in the year 1858 the French novelist
Gustav Floyd arrived in North Africa
hoping to find inspiration for his
latest book
ER was a seasoned traveler and a decade
or so earlier had embarked on a grand
tour of Cairo Constantinople Greece and
Italy
but the writer who now departed on this
new set of travels was like a different
man
although only 37 years old he was
plagued by sickness and prone to fits of
depression
and the novel he had been working on for
the last year was threatening to drive
him mad
the publication of his most famous work
two years before the novel Madame Bovary
had brought him Fame and wealth but now
he was attempting to write a piece of
fiction quite unlike anything he had
ever attempted
it would be a story from classical
history that took place in an Empire
that had once flourished in the north of
Africa had become the most powerful
Society in the ancient world and then
had vanished in its entirety more than 2
000 years ago an Empire that had been
largely forgotten beside the more
well-studied societies of Classical
Greece and Rome
this was the Empire of Carthage
he had spent the last months locked up
in his study like a Hermit surrounded by
the work of ancient historians trying to
bring the lost city of Carthage back to
life
but the writing just wouldn't come as he
wrote to his friend
Ernest Fado
I'm done for my friend done for
the past month I found it impossible to
write I can't find a single word
just think of what I've let myself in
for to resuscitate an entire
civilization with nothing whatsoever to
go on
flowbear made the decision that
something would have to change
he wrote of his intentions to his friend
Madame moiselle laroye de chant p
I absolutely must take a trip to Africa
so toward the end of March I'll return
to the land of dates
once again I live on Horseback and sleep
under a tent
I need only to go to El kef and explore
the environs of Carthage in order to
acquaint myself thoroughly with the
Landscapes I'll be describing
when he arrived in the French colony of
Tunisia flauber jotted down hurried
impressions in his notebooks as he
explored the ruins of the ancient cities
of Utica and Carthage now all but buried
beneath the modern Tunisian capital of
Tunis
in the green wheat full of flowering
poppies the road climbs little sloping
to the left and arrives at a valley
flat Plains in the middle at a League's
distance ruins like Palm treason here
and there blocks of Masonry we are
walking on the remains of a Roman Road
as he walked among the ruined walls of
this ancient city flauber felt himself
connected to the ancient people he had
been trying to write about
and saw ways of life that must have
remained almost unchanged since the days
of Carthage
in the South the village of sidibusaid
the sea behind like a great block of
indigo
all Carthage now stretches out before me
a camel on a Terrace turning a well
flies are buzzing weeds hang from the
Halls like chandeliers
a bird takes flight with the sound of a
wing another sings very fine dust
silence green marks on the walls livid
and thick water in some basins
by the time he had finished his
wanderings among the carthaginian ruins
of Tunisia flauber had decided to
completely rewrite the draft of his book
as he writes to Mademoiselle de chant p
everything I had done on my novel has to
be done over
I was on the wrong track entirely so it
turns out that a little over a year
since I first had the idea for the book
and after working hard on it most of
that time I am still only at the
beginning
armed with his Tunisian notebooks Flo
bear finished his book four years later
and it was published under the title of
salambo
the book was an enormous success
it inspired plays and later even silent
films and it is credited with renewing
public interest in a city and a culture
that had once been considered a side
note of History
as flauber walked those ruined walls and
sunken Harbors as he kicked his way
through the dust and scree of the
crumbling City ruins he must have asked
himself again and again what did it feel
like to walk the streets of that ancient
city what was it like to see Carthage at
the height of its golden age
and what would it have felt like to see
this entire city its streets and houses
its temples and theaters its harbors and
its homes utterly destroyed and buried
in dust and Ash
foreign
[Music]
my name's Paul Cooper and you're
listening to the fall of civilizations
podcast
each episode I look at a civilization of
the past that Rose to glory and then
collapsed into the ashes of History
I want to ask what did they have in
common what led to their fall and what
did it feel like to be a person alive at
the time who witnessed the end of their
world
in this episode I want to tell one of
the most dramatic stories to come down
to us from the ancient world the rise
and fall of the empire of Carthage
I want to show how this city rose out of
the Phoenician states of the Eastern
Mediterranean and set out on Voyages of
Discovery and settlement that put them
at the center of the ancient world
I want to describe the unique culture
that flourished on the shores of North
Africa and I want to tell the story of
how the city of Carthage was destroyed
and its memory nearly wiped from the
Earth
the Mediterranean Sea is a vast body of
salt water that lies between the
continents of Europe and Africa
it's by far the largest Inland Sea on
the planet stretching around 4 000
kilometers from end to end and in the
west it's connected to the Atlantic
Ocean by a thin opening at The Straits
of Gibraltar
Coastline of this sea is more than 46
000 kilometers long or enough to wrap
around the entire circumference of the
planet
and this Coastline has provided a home
to countless cultures and civilizations
over history
one of these cultures emerged on the
easternmost corner of the Mediterranean
Coast on a Stony stretch of shore in
what is today Lebanon overlooked by
towering mountains covered in Cedar
Forest
here a series of city-states rose up
more than 4 000 years ago that would
give rise to a culture that would one
day be called the Phoenicians
the largest of these cities were named
Tire sidon and biblos
just as they were between the waves to
the west and the forested mountains to
the east the territories they ruled over
were never large
but this relatively isolated geography
also meant that they were somewhat
protected from Invaders
the people we now think of as Phoenician
wouldn't have ever used that word
Phoenician is a term invented later by
their great Rivals the Greeks and it's
unclear if these cities ever thought of
themselves as a unified people
they had a common Phoenician language
and were United by the worship of
certain gods among them
a heroic god named melkart and his wife
astarte but there's very little in the
historical record to suggest a common
identity architecture or literature
even the Greek word Phoenician has a
somewhat mysterious origin
in the earliest texts such as Homer's
Iliad and odyssey the word fornike is
used to describe a particular color of
purple or crimson and it is also used to
describe a date palm possibly due to the
reddish color of its fruit when ripe
and so it's possible that the word came
to be used as a result of one of the
Phoenicians earliest and most successful
Industries
[Music]
the Phoenicians of tire and other cities
were the first people to color their
clothes with a particular kind of dye
derived from the bodies of predatory sea
snails known as the murex or Rock snail
these snails produce their dye as a
defense mechanism against predators and
depending on the species can produce a
vivid red or purple color quite unlike
anything else available in the ancient
world
from the moment these dyes were first
used by Phoenicians around the 16th
century BC their colors became
immediately sought after
but the process of producing these dyes
was difficult and costly
it could take more than 50 kilograms of
these snails to make a single gram of
dye and so these Fabrics were extremely
expensive
The Color Purple would soon become
associated with enormous wealth and as a
consequence with royalty
this color would be known as Tyrion
purple after the Phoenician city of tire
and later Imperial purple it would dye
the Robes of the Emperors of Assyria
Rome and later Byzantium
the first century Roman writer Pliny the
Elder writes about the effect this color
had on anyone who saw it
for purple the rods and axes of Rome
clear a path and it likewise marks the
Dignity of Boyhood it distinguishes
senator from Noble and it is summoned to
secure the favor of the Gods it
illuminates every garment and on the
triumphal robe it is Blended with gold
but why the price
it's possible then that the term
foyinike came to be used by the Greeks
to describe these Traders from the rocky
coast of Lebanon as the makers of purple
or the purple people
the name of the mythical creature the
Phoenix an immortal bird with red
feathers also seems to derive from the
same word
with their dye industry booming the
Phoenicians began to set out on ever
longer voyages out into the
Mediterranean Sea All In Search Of
Evermore of these Priceless snails and
these longer voyages would require new
developments in Shipbuilding
since as early as the third millennium
BC Phoenician Sailors from the city of
biblos had developed ships with curved
hulls perfectly suited for traveling on
the waves and they had developed
techniques for waterproofing the hulls
of their ships using bitumen or pitch
in the Hebrew Bible the 6th Century BC
Book of Ezekiel contains one poetic
description of a Phoenician ship
they made all your Timbers of Juniper
from senior they took a cedar from
Lebanon to make a mast for you
of Oaks from Bashan they made your oars
of Cyprus Wood from the coasts of Cyprus
they made your deck adorned with ivory
fine embroidered linen from Egypt was
your sale and served as your banner
your awnings were of blue and purple
from the coasts of Elisha
the Phoenicians were also some of the
earliest people to notice the pole star
or Polaris a star that happens to align
more or less perfectly with the
rotational axis of the Earth
this means that while all other stars
appear to rotate in the sky throughout
the night as the Earth turns the pole
star remains more or less fixed in place
this made it exceptionally useful as a
navigation tool a fixed reference point
in the sky
in Greek this star would even come to be
known as foinike or The Phoenician star
the Phoenicians early voyages around the
Mediterranean led to them encountering
many other peoples and among these they
began to cultivate a reputation as
uncompromising Traders and shrewd
businessmen something that seems to have
gained them some degree of unpopularity
Homer's Odyssey probably written down in
the 7th or 8th Century BC from even more
ancient oral Traditions describes the
Phoenicians as cunning and untrustworthy
in contrast to the supposedly Noble
Greeks
there they came Phoenicians men famed
for their ships greedy knaves bringing
countless trinkets in their black ship
and it seems the Phoenicians had become
Adept at metalworking too the following
passage in Homer's Odyssey describes an
ornate Bowl brought by Traders from The
Phoenician city of sidon
then the son of peleus said forth other
prizes a mixing bowl of silver richly
wrought in Beauty VAR the goodliest in
all the Earth sardonians well skilled in
Deft handiwork had watered cunningly a
man of the Phoenicians brought it over
the murky deep and landed it in Harbor
foreign
people the Phoenicians had a clear
preference for building their cities on
narrow easily defended peninsulas and
where possible on Islands set just
offshore
their most influential city of tire was
a perfect example located on a small
island just off the rocky Coast
in the Hebrew Bible the prophet Ezekiel
gives us a sense of the trade that the
people of Tire drove with their
surrounding Neighbors
tarshish did business with you because
of your great wealth of goods they
exchanged silver iron tin and lead for
your merchandise
Greece to balance meshech did business
with you they traded human beings and
articles of bronze for your wares men of
Beth tagama exchanged Chariot horses
Cavalry horses and mules Aram exchanged
turquoise purple fabric embroidered work
fine linen coral and rubies Judah and
Israel traded with you they exchanged
wheat from minute honey olive oil and
Balm
while the natural defenses of their
geography had kept cities like Tire
independent for much of their history
this wasn't to last forever
the first millennium BC was an age of
iron and an Age of Empires and soon the
Phoenicians found themselves in a world
of increasingly violent and aggressive
Neighbors
perhaps the most terrifying of these was
the power of the Assyrian Empire
from its Heartland in what is today Iraq
the Assyrian War Machine would
periodically stretch its power right to
the coast of the Mediterranean and
threatened to engulf the Phoenicians
one inscription from the Palace of an
Assyrian King gives just one example of
the typical fate of a city conquered by
the Assyrians
that City I destroyed I flung my
soldiers like lightning upon them
I piled up heaps of heads in front of
his Great Gate bands of captive soldiers
I impaled on Stakes on every side of his
City
his palm trees I cut down and from the
city of amidi I Departed
the Phoenicians had every reason to be
nervous
at the start of the 8th Century BC the
Assyrian King adad nurari III conquered
the territory of Northern Syria as he
boasts in his Royal Palace inscriptions
conquering from the saluna mountain of
the Rising Sun and from the banks of the
Euphrates the country of Hattie Amura in
its full extent the land of Tire the
land of saidon the land of Israel the
land of Edom the land of philistia I
made them submit to my feet imposing
upon them tribute
the Assyrians were now breathing
directly down the necks of The
Phoenician cities of the coast But as
time went on the Phoenicians were able
to carve out a niche for themselves that
ensured they were quite simply too
useful for the Assyrians to destroy
the Mediterranean Sea had long been an
insurmountable challenge to many of the
Region's great powers
the Assyrians referred to it as idmarati
or the bitter river which they believed
to flow around the whole Earth
while the Egyptians referred to it as
waj where or the great green
these Empires were freshwater river
cultures and navigated the Waters of
their rivers in flat-bottomed barges for
this reason they had always remained
wary of the rougher Waters of the sea
Syria relied heavily on many of the
Commodities brought into the region by
Phoenician Traders incense silver and
purple dive for their palaces bronze and
iron for their armies
and so Assyria offered the cities of
tire and sidon something of a deal
they would be allowed a degree of
Independence so long as they ensured a
constant flow of metals and other
resources into Assyria and so long as
they acted as a kind of Navy for hire
providing their ships and sailors to
Assyria in times of War
the Phoenicians had little choice but to
accept
but there was one problem the Assyrian
demands for metal were truly staggering
and if they were going to be met it
would require a drastic expansion of The
Phoenician Trade Network
at first the Phoenicians set up simple
trading posts anywhere they could find
good supplies of metal
archeology shows they set up trading
communities in Cyprus to take advantage
of its Rich stores of copper and in
Sardinia the mediterranean's second
largest island rich in copper iron
silver and Lead
at these sites local people usually did
all the actual mining while the
Phoenicians simply turned up to buy the
goods and take them away by ship
from Cyprus and Sardinia Phoenician
Sailors pushed on into the west of the
Mediterranean and set up a small colony
of Utica in North Africa and even
reached southern Spain where they found
that the mines practically overflowed
with silver iron and other metals
archaeologists have found huge
Phoenician furnaces in this region
designed for smelting metal ingots for
transportation on an industrial scale
all to satisfy the demands of the
Fearsome Assyrian Kings
before long the Phoenicians were sailing
out through the Straits of Gibraltar
then known as the pillars of Hercules
and out into the Atlantic Ocean
they set up a colony at Lexus on the
western coast of Morocco and pushed
further down the coast to settle what is
now the Moroccan Port Town of esawira
more than 4 000 kilometers from their
Homeland
to finance these Expeditions the
Phoenicians developed Innovative
monetary systems that in some ways
represented a form of ancient capitalism
Phoenician Society was dominated by
powerful trading firms usually run by a
certain family and they pioneered the
use of interest-bearing loans for
voyages even developing Maritime
insurance policies which paid out if
your ships were destroyed in a storm or
plundered by Pirates
but perhaps the greatest of their
Innovations was something that we use
every day
and that is the alphabet
up until that point writing had been a
cumbersome and difficult task
the cuneiform writing systems that had
been developed by the Sumerians
thousands of years before and the
hieroglyphics of the Egyptians were both
difficult to learn and relied on the
services of a learned class of scribes
who spent years of their lives learning
them but the Phoenician alphabet was a
master class in Simplicity it had only
22 letters and could be used to spell
out words phonetically leaving out any
vowels and quite ingeniously the shapes
of the letters also gave a clue as to
how they were pronounced
the letter B for instance was named bet
which was The Phoenician word for house
and its symbol was drawn with a pointed
roof this Simplicity drastically reduced
the amount of time it took to learn and
meant that common Traders and Merchants
may have had some ability to read and
write and to keep records essential for
the complex business of buying and
selling across the sea
The Phoenician alphabet was such a good
idea that it was adopted almost
wholesale by the Greeks as the Greek
historian Herodotus recounts
these Phoenicians who came with Cadmus
brought with them to Greece among many
other kinds of learning the alphabet
as time went on the sound and form of
the letters were changed and after being
taught the letters by the Phoenicians
the Greeks Who were settled around them
used them with a few changes of four
with the addition of some letters for
vowels what resulted was the Greek
alphabet which means that the Phoenician
writing system is the foundation of all
Western alphabets used today
the earliest piece of Phoenician writing
was found on an inscribed tablet known
as the Nora Stone Unearthed in Sardinia
apparently commemorating a Phoenician
Captain who may have died in conflict
with the local people
he fought with the sardinians at
tarshish and he drove them out
among the sardinians he is now at peace
and his army is at peace milkaton
son of shubna general of King pumay
but for the most part the Phoenicians
seemed to have interacted with the
people they met relatively peacefully
and most of all profitably
before long the cities of Tire sidon and
biblos found themselves at the far East
of a sprawling Trade Network
keeping such a loose and disparate
collection of colonies together was no
easy task but it seems that here The
Phoenician religion played a key role
the people of Tire worshiped a heroic
God known as melkart a warrior hero who
the Greeks would later associate with
Hercules
temples to melkart were set up at
multiple Phoenician trading posts and
most had an olive tree a symbol of the
city of Tire growing in their Central
Courtyard
the grandest of these temples was built
at the furthest Phoenician colony from
tire there known as Gadis what is narrow
the Spanish city of Cadiz
this Colony sat on the Atlantic coast
just outside the Straits of Gibraltar
but it made up for its extreme distance
from Tire with its immense opulence
at the center of the temple stood an
olive tree with its branches and leaves
wrought out of solid gold holding
Emerald fruits in its branches
women were forbidden entry to the temple
as were Pigs and the priests of melkart
went Barefoot wearing a band of Egyptian
flax over their bare heads
the Greek geographer strabo recounts the
following description of the settlement
of guardis
now these islands are this side of what
are called the pillars of Heracles Gades
however is outside the pillars
here lift The Men Who fit out the most
and largest Merchant vessels both for
our sea and the outer sea they say the
tyrians believed that the two capes
which formed the strait were the ends of
the inhabited world
a great ceremony known as the addresses
or Awakening was conducted each year in
the temple of guardis
during this time all foreigners were
asked to leave the city and a great
Effigy Of The God melkart was set afloat
on the sea and burned
and even this Temple was a crucial part
of the Phoenician trading system
the institution worked to guarantee the
quality of metal ingots produced in
gardies by giving them a special stamp
and acted as a guarantor between
Merchants entering into contracts with
punishments promised from melkart
himself if any dared to go back on their
word
with Phoenician trade increasingly
drifting Westward the center of their
power would soon also shift in that
direction to a place where they would
finally be free of the overbearing
Empires constantly breathing down their
necks
they would soon found a city on the
shore of North Africa right at the
center of the Mediterranean World a city
that would become one of the largest and
wealthiest on Earth
that City would one day be known as
Carthage
like so many aspects of our modern
understanding of the Phoenicians the
name Carthage is itself a distortion
filtered through the accounts of others
in Latin the city was known as carthago
while the Greeks called it carcadon but
to its inhabitants it was known as Kat
hadashed or in Phoenician the new city
like many great cities of its time
Carthage soon developed its own founding
myth
it begins with a princess of Tire named
Alyssa or elishaya in the legend the
king of tire promises that upon his
death his kingdom would be split between
his two children his daughter elishaia
and his son Pygmalion
but when the Old King dies the
treacherous brother Pygmalion refuses to
accept the splitting of the kingdom and
moves to seize everything for himself
even killing elishaia's husband to
remove any potential rivals
stricken with grief elishaya flees down
to the docks along with a ragtag band of
her royal guards and Temple women and
there they set sail westwards and make
for Africa
the Roman writer justineus drawing on an
earlier Greek text writes his rendition
of this story along with a cunning
deception to slow down any greedy
pursuers
Alyssa put the attendance who was sent
by the king to assist in her removal on
board some vessels in the early part of
the evening and sailing out into the
deep made them throw some loads of sand
put up in sacks as if it was money into
the sea
this group of refugees sail along the
coast of North Africa
until eventually they set ashore near
The Phoenician colony of Utica they camp
on a nearby Hill known as Bursa and the
king who rules there a man named yarbrus
takes pity on them but not too much pity
he offers to sell them a plot of land on
the hill no bigger than an ox hide
but elishaya is cunning she cuts the
oxide Into Thin strips lining them up to
enclose the entire Hill a much larger
area of land than the miserly king had
intended
Bound by his word yarbus has no choice
but to give them the land he promised
and so the city of Carthage is born
justineus recounts the city's early
flourishing
Carthage was founded an annual tribute
being fixed for the ground which it was
to occupy
at the commencement of digging the
foundations an ox's head was found which
was an omen that the city would be
wealthy indeed but laborious and always
enslaved it was therefore removed to
another place where the head of a horse
was found which indicating that the
people would be warlike and Powerful
portended an auspicious sight in a short
time as the surrounding people came
together at the report the inhabitants
became numerous and the city itself
extensive
from the hilltop of Bursa the city grows
and grows soon eclipsing King ayabus's
town of Utica which makes him
understandably jealous he demands that
elishaya marry him so that he can absorb
her flourishing town and everything she
owns into his kingdom
if she refuses he will burn Carthage to
the ground
faced with the choice of this
capitulation or the destruction of her
new city elishaya builds a great pyre
and climbs onto it saying that she must
indeed go to her husband meaning not a
yarbus but the man her brother had
killed on the other side of the sea
waiting for her in the afterlife
this tragic but Noble self-sacrifice has
proven irresistible to generations of
poets and the Roman poet Virgil gives
one rendition of this scene
when the pyre of cut Pine and Oak was
raised high in an innermost Court opened
to the sky the queen hung the place with
garlands and wreathed it with funeral
foliage
she laid his sword and clothes and
picture on the bed she lingered a while
in tears and thought
then
cast herself on the bed and spoke her
last words
this soul
and lose me from my sorrows
in honor of elishaya's sacrifice her
people gave her the title of dido
meaning Female warrior or heroine and
this is the name by which he would be
known to later Roman writers
this Baroque tale of love and tragedy
has all the Hallmarks of ancient
literature and we can't assume that it
Bears any relationship to what actually
happened
some details of the tale do a chord with
what archeology tells us that the
carthaginian Phoenicians Drew their
Origins back to the city of tire and
that the city was founded close to the
older settlement of Utica which it soon
eclipsed in size
but perhaps more important than any of
this is the sense that this founding
myth might give us of the way the
carthaginians thought of themselves and
their city's place in the world as a
city of survivors who had found Refuge
here on the North African Coast a city
of sailors and adventurers
they were resourceful and drove a hard
bargain they were clever fond of
outwitting their enemies always finding
a way to make a little go a long way
and also perhaps that they would die
before they gave up their freedom
regardless of the truth of its Origins
it's clear from archeology that after
its founding in the 8th Century BC the
new colony of Carthage did grow
exceptionally quickly
in many ways it was the perfect
Phoenician settlement
Carthage was built in a small Bay that
itself belonged to a vast natural Harbor
known today as the Bay of Tunis
the city sat on top of a series of sheer
Red Cliffs that looked down over the
glittering Blue Waters of the
Mediterranean in the north and it was
also easily defended on its landward
side where a range of rocky hills and a
number of lakes and saltwater lagoons
break the land into a series of narrow
approaches protecting the city from any
would-be attackers
the Roman writer Appian writes one
description of the city's location
the city lay in a recess of a Great Gulf
and was in the form of a peninsula it
was separated from the mainland by an
isthmus about five kilometers in width
from this Isthmus a narrow and longish
tongue of land about a kilometer wide
extended towards the West between a lake
and the sea
near to the site of Carthage flows a
river known today as the majority which
originates in the high Atlas Mountains
of North Africa this river flows for 460
kilometers to the Sea and brings crucial
fresh water into the bay turning the
otherwise arid landscape green and
providing water for drinking and for
irrigation
as a result the land here was abundant
with wheat grapes olives and dates
in the distance over the bay to the
South Rises the blue outline of the
mountain Jebel rasas literally the
mountain of lead a rugged outcrop of
Jurassic Limestone climbing nearly 800
meters above the plain the hot Desert
Winds known as the Sirocco would blow in
from the Sahara during the summer season
rattling the shutters on the windows and
the leaves of the date palms and at the
end of summer thunderstorms would roll
in from the sea
as well as its ideal geography the
city's location in the Mediterranean
world was also perfect
Carthage sat at a crucial halfway point
between the city of tire and the wealthy
mines of Spain but it was also only
about 200 kilometers by boat from the
island of Sicily and about 300
kilometers from Sardinia two crucial
sites of Phoenician industry that were
only growing in importance
Pottery found in even the earliest
layers of Carthage shows a huge range of
styles coming from Greece Italy Spain
and all the Phoenician colonies
The Phoenician world was now a web with
Carthage sitting right at its Center
the city in these early days must have
been a humble sight
archeology paints a picture of a simple
collection of mud brick buildings lining
the seashore but within a century this
had exploded
one graveyard soon had to be moved in
order to make space for a quarter filled
with metal working workshops and the
settlers built a wall about three meters
in height to protect their burgeoning
town
soon more Monumental buildings would be
constructed the Rowan poet Virgil
imagines the activity that must have
accompanied the growth of this town from
Tiny settlement to booming City
Aeneas found where lately Huts had been
marvelous buildings gateways cobbled
ways and din of wagons there the tyrions
were hard at work laying courses for
walls rolling up stones to build the
Citadel While others picked out building
sites and plowed a boundary Furrow laws
were being enacted magistrates and a
sacred Senate chosen here men were
dredging Harbors there they laid the
Deep foundations of a theater and
quarried massive pillars
other than what we can glean from
archeology we know very little about the
early history of Carthage
apart from a few short inscriptions no
carthaginian texts have survived into
the modern day and so in terms of
written history we have virtually
complete silence from that part of the
Mediterranean for the first 200 years or
so of its existence and beyond that we
have to rely on the writings of others
from the work of Greek writers we
learned that Carthage was a republic
it was ruled under a kind of oligarchic
system governed by a council of its
wealthiest citizens
the Greek philosopher Aristotle writing
in the 4th Century spoke approvingly of
the carthaginian system of government
and Compares it to that of the Greek
city-state of Sparta
Carthage also appears to have a good
Constitution with many outstanding
features as compared with those of other
nations but most nearly resembling the
Spartan at some points many regulations
at Carthage are good and a proof of a
well-regulated constitution is that the
populace willingly remain faithful to
the Constitutional system and that
neither civil Strife has arisen in any
degree worth mentioning nor yet a tyrant
but Aristotle also warns that the
carthaginian system put too much
emphasis on the wealth of its rulers
rather than their competence and
expresses concerns that this could lead
to corruption
they think that the rulers should be
chosen not only for their Merit but also
for their wealth as it is not possible
for a poor man to govern well or to have
Leisure for his duties it is a bad thing
that the greatest officers of State the
kingship and the general ship should be
for sale
for this law makes wealth more honored
than worth and renders the whole state
avaricious and it is probable that those
who purchase their office will learn by
degrees to make a profit out of it
highest echelons of carthaginian society
were divided between the Civil leaders
the chauffeur Tim or judges and the
rabim or generals who took care of
military matters
these highest positions senators and the
heads of committees Drew no salary for
their work and so they could
realistically only be held by those who
could support themselves on private
incomes usually successful merchants or
wealthy landowners but there was a
certain fairness to this there seems to
have been no barrier other than wealth
and people from common backgrounds who
became wealthy could quickly rise to the
highest parts of government
certain powerful families were
constantly vying for the most powerful
positions but there was no hereditary
royalty in Carthage
it's possible that the myth of elishaya
or Dido may have played a role in
maintaining this situation
since according to the legend the city
was founded by a woman who had no
children no one could ever claim to be
her true descendants or have any kind of
ancestral right to rule
instead the city was governed by a
number of different semi-democratic
bodies made up of wealthy citizens
one of these was called the tribunal of
the 104 and another the Council of
Elders a kind of Senate
the highest executive position was held
by two elected officers who ruled
simultaneously and who were elected each
year
the arrangement was complex and likely
prone to corruption but for the most
part it seems to have worked
World Carthage flourished The Phoenician
cities that had given birth to it began
to flounder
tire and sidon were still under the boot
of Assyria and around 670 BC the
Assyrian King Esso hadon began to place
harsh restrictions on who they could
trade with
when Assyria went to war with Egypt
srhadon forced the Phoenicians of Tire
to place a trade embargo on the Pharaohs
without access to their once most
lucrative Market these cities went into
decline
soon the king of tire was not even
allowed to open messages without an
Assyrian official present as the
following surviving fragment of one
treaty shows
nor must you open a letter which I send
you without the presence of the royal
deputy
if the Royal Deputy is absent wait for
him and then open it if a ship of the
people of tire is Shipwrecked off the
coast of the land of the Philistines or
anywhere on the borders of Assyrian
territory everything that is on the ship
belongs to Essa Haddon king of Assyria
as a result of the decline of cities
like tire and sidon it's likely that
large numbers of Phoenicians would have
fled to what was narrow the Undisputed
capital of The Phoenician world the
booming Port Town of Carthage
they brought with them their language
their knowledge their gods and their
gold
by the 6th Century BC Carthage was one
of the largest and wealthiest cities in
the Mediterranean
and its Sailors the finest in the world
would soon embark on Voyages of
exploration that would not be matched
for another 2 000 years
by this time the Phoenicians had already
sailed right to the end of their world
through the pillars of Hercules and out
into the Atlantic Ocean
but their exploration didn't stop there
in fact if ancient sources are to be
believed they may have been the first
Navigators to successfully sail around
the entire coast of Africa
Herodotus recounts one Expedition that
supposedly took place around 600 BC
sponsored by a pharaoh of Egypt named
nekos although he is frustratingly vague
and short on detail
the Expedition apparently set sail from
Egypt's Red Sea Coast voyaged Around the
Horn of Africa and the South African
Cape before sailing North through the
Gulf of Guinea and back into the
Mediterranean through the pillars of
Hercules
nekos of Egypt sent Phoenicians and
ships instructing them to sail on their
return Voyage past the pillars of
Heracles until they came into the
northern sea and so to Egypt
so the Phoenicians set out from the Red
Sea and sailed to the Southern Sea
whenever Autumn came they would put in
and plant the land in whatever part of
Libya they had reached and there await
the Harvest
then having gathered the crop they
sailed on so that after two years had
passed it was in the third that they
rounded the pillars of Heracles and came
to Egypt
there they said what some may believe
though I do not
that in sailing around Libya they had
the sun on their right hand
interestingly it is this detail the
Herodotus personally finds unbelievable
that has caused modern Scholars to take
the claim more seriously
the change in the position of the sun
relative to the ship suggests that the
voyage did indeed cross the Tropic of
Cancer and perhaps even the equator
causing the Summer sun to appear in the
north modern estimates consider a
journey time of three years to be a
reasonable duration for a
circumnavigation of Africa that would
have been about twenty thousand
kilometers long or half the way around
the world
if this story is true then it means the
Phoenicians may have rounded the Cape of
Africa more than 2 000 years before the
Portuguese explorer bartolomew Diaz
would do the same thing in 1488 opening
up The Passage to India and the age of
European colonialism
more solidly attested Voyages of
Phoenician Discovery would see an
Explorer named Hano the Navigator sail
out into the Atlantic Ocean through the
pillars of Hercules and sail perhaps as
far south as Cameroon or Gabon in West
Africa
his voyage is recounted in a Greek
translation entitled The periplus or
travel account of Hano supposedly an
accurate copy of an inscription that's
actually hung in the temple of Bal Haman
in Carthage
it was decreed by the carthaginians that
Hano should undertake a voyage beyond
the pillars of Hercules and found
Phoenician cities
we sailed accordingly with 60 ships or
50 years each and the body of men and
women to the number of thirty thousand
and Provisions and other necessaries
preceding a day's sale we came to the
extremity of the lake that was overhung
by large mountains inhabited by Savage
men clothed in the skins of wild beasts
who drove us away by throwing stones and
hindered us from Landing
sailing vents we came to another river
that was large and Broad and full of
crocodiles and hippopotamuses
Hano writes down vivid descriptions of
seeing active volcanoes spewing lava
into the ocean possibly the active
volcano Mount Cameroon
and then quickly sailing forth we passed
by a burning country full of fragrance
from which great torrents of fire flowed
down to the Sea and we sailed along with
all speed being stricken by fear
after a journey of four days we saw the
land at night covered with flames and in
the midst there was one lofty fire
greater than the rest which seemed to
touch the Stars
Hano even seems to have been the first
to write down an encounter with what may
have been Earth's largest living
primates with unfortunate results
we arrived at a bay called the southern
horn at the bottom of which lay an
Island full of savage people the greater
part of whom were women whose bodies
were hairy and whom our interpreters
called gorillae
though we pursued the men we could not
seize any of them but all fled from us
escaping over the precipices and
defending themselves with stones
three women were however taken but they
attacked their conductors with their
teeth and hands and could not be
prevailed upon to accompany us
having killed them we flayed them and
brought their skins with us to Carthage
we did not sail farther on our
Provisions failing us
these hairy creatures may have been
chimpanzees monkeys or what we today
would call gorillas all of which can be
encountered in the region of Cameroon
on hano's return the hairy skins he
brought home were kept in the temple to
the god tanet in Carthage and according
to Pliny the Elder would remain in the
city for as long as it existed
in the 19th century when the American
physician and missionary Thomas storton
Savage and the naturalist Jeffries Wyman
wrote the first scientific description
of a gorilla they gave them the name
troglodytey's gorilla after the
mysterious description in hano's writing
and the name has stuck ever since
another Explorer named himilko sailed
out into the Atlantic and went in the
opposite direction sailing North up the
coast of Spain and France and even on to
the British Isles
here he saw Celtic tribes people sailing
in coracles made of dear skin a site he
found remarkable
they cleaved the tempestuous Sea and the
current of the ocean abounding in
Monsters with woven boats indeed these
people do not know how to Fashion Keels
with pine and maple but in a miraculous
thing they always fit out vessels from
hides stretched together and often
travel through the immense sea in a skin
himelco also brought back stories of the
vast expanse of the Atlantic to the West
a frightening sight to the sailors
brought up in the enclosed Inland Sea of
the Mediterranean
Beyond towards the area to the West
there is a sea Without End
the ocean lies open across a wide area
and the Sea stretches out
no man has entered upon these seas
because the sea lacks winds that would
drive the ships along and no Breeze from
the sky favors a ship
it also seems that he may have seen
whales swimming out there in the ocean
which were then nearly four times more
numerous than they are today
here and there see monsters swim admit
the slow ships sluggishly crawling along
himilko reported that he had once seen
these creatures in the ocean and proved
their existence these we have related to
you revealed a long time ago deep in the
annals of the carthaginians
in 2019 a team of 20 modern Sailors
successfully piloted a replica of a
single mastered carthaginian Merchant
vessel across the Atlantic Ocean
departing from the site of Carthage and
landing in the Caribbean five months
later demonstrating that Phoenician
ships had the ability to reach the
Americas two thousand years before
Columbus
oh
as the city of Carthage grew its
population boomed
while some ancient writers record it as
having a population of more than 700 000
people this is thought to be unlikely
but estimates based on the size of the
city and the size of Civilian armies
drawn up in times of Crisis have
suggested that the population may have
reached four hundred thousand
by the year 400 BC the city walls had
been rebuilt to now stand a towering 15
meters high with a triple line of
ditches and defenses on the landward
side the hill of birsa where legend has
it that elishaya played her trick with
the ox hide was now itself ringed with
an inner defensive wall and loomed over
the rest of the city as a fortified
Citadel
the Roman writer Appian writes the
following description of the city
on the seaside the city was protected by
a single wall
toward the South and the mainland with a
citadel of Bursa stood on the Isthmus it
was a triple War
the height of each wall was 15 meter
without counting parapets and Towers
which were separated from each other by
a space of 60 meters
one of the most remarkable features of
ancient Carthage was the Innovative
design of its harbor known as the kothon
likely built sometime in the third or
second century BC this comprised a large
rectangular commercial Harbor for
civilian ships that led into a unique
circular Docking Bay for the military
ships of carthage's War Fleet
the harbor was so large that today the
shape of its outline can still be seen
in the coast of the city of Tunis
Appian describes the unique design of
this Harbor
the harbors had communication with each
other and a common entrance from the sea
20 meters wide which could be closed
with iron chains
the first Port was for merchant vessels
and here were collected all kinds of
ships tackle
within the second Port was an island
which together with the port itself was
enclosed by High embankments these
embankments were full of shipyards which
had capacity for 220 vessels
above there were magazines for their
tackle and furniture
two ionic columns stood in front of each
dock
on the Island was built to Admiral's
house from which the trumpeter gave
signals The Herald delivered orders and
the Admiral himself overlooked
everything
at this time Carthage had the largest
and most powerful Fleet in the
Mediterranean and the military Port was
built to conceal the ships docked within
and ensure that no spies could glean any
of their secrets or keep tabs on their
movements
the island Line near the entrance to the
harbor and Rose to a considerable height
so that the Admiral could observe what
was going on at Sea while those who were
approaching by water could not get any
clear view of what took place within
not even the incoming Merchants could
see the docks for a double wall and
close them and there were Gates by which
Merchant ships could pass from the first
port to the city without traversing the
dockyards search was the appearance of
Carthage at the time
between the harbor and the Citadel of
birsa on the hill stood the Agora the
large Open Marketplace of the city where
all manner of goods and Foods could be
bought
archaeological studies of plant matter
found in Carthage show that the ancient
carthaginians enjoyed a varied diet
walking through the markets of the city
you will be able to buy wheat barley and
other grains numerous vegetables like
artichokes and cabbages pulses and
lentils and fruits including
pomegranates grapes figs olives peaches
plums and melons as well as nuts like
pistachios and almonds
olives were pressed into oil and its
people ate fish like gray mullet sea
perch eels and dolphins as well as the
meat of sheep pigs goats chickens and
occasionally even dogs
the carthaginians like most people in
the ancient world were obsessed with a
pungent salty Source known as garum
which was brewed from the fermenting of
fish and trails and which was probably
similar to the fish sauce used today in
East Asian Cuisine
in the wreck of one carthaginian ship
found off the coast of Sicily in Masala
archaeologists have also uncovered the
remains of cannabis stalks which may
have been chewed by the ship's rowers
and could also have been enjoyed on land
either chewed or brewed into a tea
wine was particularly beloved too and
especially a particular kind of sweet
dessert wine made from sun-dried grapes
one agricultural handbook written by a
carthaginian named Margot has survived
in fragments of Greek and Latin
translation and it describes the process
of making this wine
pick some well-ripened early grapes
discard any that are mildewed or damaged
lay down Reeds and spread the grapes out
in the sun on top cover them at night so
that the Jew will not moisten them
when they are dried pick the grapes off
stems and put them in a jar or pitcher
add some unfermented wine the best you
have until the grapes are just covered
after six days when the grapes have
absorbed it all and are swollen put them
in a basket put them through the press
and collect the resulting liquid bottle
the liquid in stopper jars and after 20
or 30 days when the fermentation is over
coat the lids with plaster and cover
them with leather
as a typical Phoenician City Carthage
initially had a small footprint in North
Africa and in its early days it was
reliant on its overseas territories in
Sardinia and Sicily for more than half
of its food brought across the sea on
grain ships
but in the 6th Century it began to
expand its territory around the city
the carthaginians either expelled local
people or came to agreements with them
and built a network of towns and forts
to the south east and west and began to
farm the land themselves
a later writer diodorous of Sicily would
Pan the following description of the
Abundant Hinterland that would soon
stretch beyond the city
all the lands were set with Gardens and
Orchards watered by numerous Springs and
canals
there were well-constructed country
houses built with lime along the Route
announcing widespread wealth
the land was cultivated with vines olive
trees and a whole host of fruit trees on
both sides there were herds of oxen and
sheep grazing on the plane and near the
main pastures and the marshes there were
studs of horses
in its outposts in Sardinia Spain and
Sicily Carthage began a similar process
turning what had once been small trading
posts into more solid and fortified
territories with their own agricultural
land
soon the city of Carthage would be more
or less self-sufficient as the Roman
writer Appian describes
gradually acquiring strength they
mastered Africa and the greater part of
the Mediterranean
carried War into Sicily and Sardinia and
the other islands of that sea and also
into Spain they sent out numerous
colonies
it became a match for the Greeks in
power and next to the Persians in wealth
the typical carthaginian House was built
around a central Courtyard and the
wealthier dwellings has an upstairs and
a Terrace
finer houses had cupboards and shelves
built into the walls and often a clay
bread oven
we can imagine the smells of this baking
bread wafting through the city's streets
along with the pungent Aromas from the
tanneries and wineries the smells of
animals and incense cooked fish and
salty garum sauce
wealthy houses also contained elaborate
bathrooms with separate changing
facilities and baths plastered with
water resistant stucco before bathing
oil would be applied to the body
and a bronze tool known as a stridgel
was used to scrape dirt from the skin
while in Greek houses these bathrooms
were usually built off the kitchen the
carthaginians built their bathrooms next
to the entrance to the house suggesting
that there was some sort of ritual
purpose to the bathing
separating the dusty unclean world of
outside from the clean Inner Space of
the home
a variety of animals would have been
visible on the crowded city streets
these would have included beasts of
Burden like donkeys oxen and horses
stray dogs and cats and noisy Caravans
of camels coming in from the desert
but they also seem to have drawn animals
as Curiosities from all parts of Africa
a species of huge lion known as the
Barbary lion could be found all across
this region and would later be captured
for spectacles including in the Roman
arenas
and a species of monkey known as the
Barbary macaque is also native to this
area
diodorous of Sicily records One account
of carthaginians keeping these monkeys
as apparently much beloved pets
in these cities many of the Customs were
very different from those current Among
Us
for the Apes lived in the same houses as
the men being regarded among them as
Gods just as the dogs are among the
Egyptians and from the provisions laid
up in the storerooms the beasts took
their food without hindrance whenever
they wished for any who killed this
animal as if he had committed the
greatest sacrilege death was established
as the penalty
around this time monkeys began appearing
as a motif in the art of regions of
Italy Sardinia and elsewhere suggesting
that the carthaginians were even
exporting this animal to other regions
some Barbary macaques were mummified in
Egyptian tombs alongside pharaohs and
the skull of a Barbary macaque dated to
around this time has even been Unearthed
as far away as Northern Ireland
and of course in vast Stables to the
south of the city were kept the animals
that in most people's minds are most
inseparably associated with the city of
Carthage
that is the elephant
the North African elephant is an extinct
subspecies of the African elephant that
lived north of the Sahara Desert
carthaginian paintings on walls coins
and mosaics show that these elephants
had the swooping backs and large ears
typical of the African elephant that
roams the Savannah
but it was considerably smaller and was
likely similar in size to another
surviving subspecies the African Forest
elephant
these reach a shoulder height of about
two and a half meters only a little
taller than the largest Shire horses but
of course they're thick and heavy frames
mean they weigh more than 15 times the
average horse
for this reason these elephants were
used by the carthaginians as fearsome
weapons of war
some historians have speculated that
Carthage may also have imported some
much larger Indian elephants which were
at that time being used by the seleucid
Dynasty in Syria
one elephant that was the pride of the
later carthaginian Army was known by the
name surus which some have translated to
mean the Syrian
if true this Syrian elephant would have
towered as much as a meter over the
smaller carthaginian elephants and would
have been a truly terrifying sight on
the battlefield
in India and Southeast Asia it has
always been common to use elephants as
work animals to transport heavy loads
for construction but it's not clear
whether the carthaginians used their
elephants in this manner or whether
these precious animals were only
reserved for their power and Prestige to
be used as living tanks on the
battlefield as the writer Pliny the
Elder describes
elephants when tamed are employed in war
and carry into the ranks of the enemy
Towers filled with armed men
and on them in a very great measure
depends the ultimate result of the
battles that are fought in the east
they tread underfoot whole companies
and crush the men in their armor
but I think it's not hard to imagine
that as in India elephants may also have
been used ceremonially in festivals and
parades to carry Kings and Generals a
living embodiment of the might of this
new Empire
while Carthage didn't hesitate to go to
war to defend its interests and protect
its trade it was not at heart a warrior
culture and it never suffered a conflict
to continue any longer than it
absolutely had to
the carthaginians often relied on
diplomatic Solutions and agreements to
avoid fighting with their various
Neighbors in the Mediterranean
one such agreement was settled in the
year 509 BC with a minor city-state in
central Italy in the region of Latium
whose people spoke a small italic
dialect called Latin
this City's people had just that year
thrown off the rule of their Etruscan
King and abolished kingship in the city
for good in place of a king they had
brought in the rule of a pair of elected
consuls drawn from the aristocracy a
system strikingly similar to and perhaps
even inspired by the carthaginians
this City's name was Rome
the Romans at that time were among
several powers in central Italy facing
rivals in the Etruscans to the north and
Powerful tribal confederacies like the
samnites all fighting for dominance in
the plains of central Italy
the carthaginians seem to have taken
note of this Regional development and
proceeded to sign a treaty with this new
Roman Republic the contents of which the
Greek historian polybius records
will be friendship between the Romans
and lies and the carthaginians and their
allies on these conditions neither the
Romans nor their allies are to sail
beyond the fair Peninsula unless driven
by stress of weather or the fear of
enemies if any one of them be driven
ashore he shall not buy or take anything
for himself save what is needed for the
repair of his ship and the service of
the Gods and he shall depart within five
days Carthage shall build no fort in
Latium and if they enter the district in
arms they shall not stay a night therein
theme of this treaty was simple you
leave us alone and we will leave you
alone
and while Rome was at this point very
much on the carthaginian's radar it
seems that they considered this Italian
city Republic to be little cause of
concern
around the year 410 BC Carthage began
minting its own silver coins and each
coin will be stamped with the symbol of
a palm tree in Greek known as voynike
now becoming a symbol of Phoenician
identity
Carthage was now presenting itself as
the new champion of the Phoenician
people the capital of The Phoenician
world
it was now Beginning to Look a Lot Like
An Empire and like all Empires it soon
found an increasing need to defend and
expand its territory
it's often said that Carthage relied on
Mercenaries to fight its Wars but this
is something of an oversimplification
while these kinds of armies For Hire did
make up one part of their forces in fact
there were all kinds of reasons that
people came to fight for the Empire of
Carthage
many of their soldiers were sent to
fight for them as part of treaties just
as the Phoenicians had once promised to
send their ships to fight for Assyria
and as Carthage expanded to conquer new
peoples all along the North African
coast and across the Mediterranean
Evermore power and variety was added to
its forces
when war came each Ally and Province
would send fighters of a particular kind
based on what they specialized in
the North African power of numidia to
the west of Carthage sent powerful and
experienced Cavalry and Javelin throwers
while colonies in the island of Majorca
would send Slingers and peasant spearmen
with large round shields were
conscripted from the fields of Libya in
the east
Celts from Spain made up some part of
their forces and sometimes even Greeks
and Italians ended up fighting in these
armies
there was only one group of people who
hardly ever fought for Carthage and that
was the citizens of Carthage themselves
the carthaginian system relied largely
on making life as comfortable as
possible for the people of the capital
few carthaginian politicians ever risked
the unpopular move of conscripting its
citizens into the army and so they
amassed their forces out of units
brought from all the four corners of the
empire
each Army of Carthage was its own unique
Patchwork and would have spoken dozens
of different languages as the Greek
historian polybius writes
it was therefore impossible to assemble
them and address them as a body or to do
so by any other means for how could any
general be expected to know all their
languages and again to address them
through several interpreters repeating
the same thing four or five times was if
anything more impractical
it was a system that had many weaknesses
but it's allowed the Empire to raise
large armies at short notice and it
meant that since they could never be
accused of sending good carthaginian men
to Die the politicians of the city were
largely insulated from the consequences
of going to war
but soon these armies would find
themselves embroiled in a bitter
struggle that would test this system to
its breaking point and threaten to bring
the whole empire to the brink of
Destruction
these wars would erupt over what would
soon become the most fought over piece
of land in the Mediterranean
that is the island of Sicily
Sicily is the largest island in the
Mediterranean Sea
it sits off the southern end of Italy
separated by the narrow Waters of The
Straits of Messina only three kilometers
wide at its narrowest point
Sicily's most prominent Landmark is the
volcano Mount Aetna towering at three
thousand meters over its eastern coast
and due to the islands particularly
violent geology this is one of the most
active volcanoes in the world
although we think of it today as part of
Europe Sicily is actually on the
Northern edge of the African continental
plate right at the impact point where
the European plate is grinding it
downwards into the Earth's mantle
the Collision of these Titanic forces
means that Mount Etna erupts an average
200 times every year
the volcanic ash spewed by this volcano
gives the soil of Sicily an incredible
fertility meaning that its farmlands
have always been rich
at first Carthage enjoyed an unrivaled
position on the island trading with the
Sicilian locals in the west just a short
hop away from their capital in Africa
but soon they would come into conflict
with another group of people that for
much of this history would be their
greatest rivals on the sea and the land
are people who were at the same time
also busy establishing colonies across
the Mediterranean
these were the Greeks
the Greeks like the Phoenicians were
expert Sailors and had built a number of
thriving colonies in southern Italy in
what is now turkey and in the Black Sea
and beginning in the 8th Century BC
Greek explorers and Traders began
expanding their interests onto the
island of Sicily
like the Phoenicians the Greeks at this
time weren't a unified people
they spoke four different dialects of
Greek and countless sub-dialects and
came from dozens of independent
city-states and Island kingdoms that
often fought with each other more
bitterly than with any foreigners
but despite these internal divisions the
Greeks would expand across the southern
portion of Italy and Sicily and joined
up this series of colonies into an area
that they would call megali Halas or
greater Greece
wherever they went Greek settlers were
in part inspired by the myth of their
hero Heracles who the Romans would call
Hercules
he was a half Divine Warrior who
traveled the length and breadth of
Europe performing his famous twelve
labors and meanwhile performing great
Deeds wherever he passed through
and wherever a new Greek colony sprung
up around the Mediterranean a new
installment of the Hercules myth would
quickly be added to show that this had
also been one of his stops in some
places he was celebrated for slaying
Giants and mythical beasts while in
others his Feats were more mundane
in the Greek colonies of southern Italy
he was remembered for banishing a plague
of flies that was harming the livestock
in Crete he had rid the island of wild
beasts and in Sicily he had caught an
errant Bull and bested the king in a
wrestling match
in Spain diodrus of Sicily recounts that
depending on who you asked Hercules was
credited with either creating the
Straits of Gibraltar by tearing the land
apart or with narrowing it to keep out
sea monsters
whereas before that time a great space
had stood between Africa and Europe he
now narrowed the passage in order that
by making it shallow and narrow he might
prevent the great sea monsters from
passing out of the ocean and into the
Inner Sea
some authorities however say just the
opposite namely that the two continents
were originally joined and that he cut a
passage between them that the ocean was
mingled with the sea
on this question however it would be
possible for every man to think as he
may please
in one of the most dramatic episodes of
these Tales during his tenth labor
Hercules is tasked with stealing the red
cattle of the ogre gerion who lived in
arithia in southern Spain close to the
Phoenician colony of Gadis
since carry on lived so far in the west
it was said the hides of his cattle had
been stained red by their close
proximity to the Setting Sun
after killing garyon Hercules takes his
cattle and herds them all the way back
home to Greece in a Meandering route
that took him from Spain through
southern France and Over The Soaring
Snowy Mountains of the Alps and on into
Italy as diodorus recounts
Hercules then made his way to Italy and
as he traversed the mountain pass
through the Alps he made a highway out
of the route which was rough and almost
impossible The Barbarians who had
inhabited this mountain region had been
accustomed to Butcher and to plunder
such armies as pass through when they
came to the difficult portions of the
way but he subdued them all
the story of Hercules bringing these
cattle from Spain over these mountains
was the dramatic Pinnacle of a series of
myths that would become known as the
heraclion way
it was a series of stories that would be
told to countless generations of Greek
settlers and then to the children of the
Romans who followed them and as The
Phoenician hero God melkart became
increasingly associated with Hercules in
later years these stories would also be
told to the children of Carthage
with stories of this wandering Hero on
their lips the Greek settlements in
eastern Sicily grew
for several centuries they maintained an
uneasy peace with the carthaginian
colonies in the west of the island
but as both Powers began to require
greater amounts of land they would soon
find themselves on a collision course
the exact dating and details of these
wars is still fiercely contested but
it's clear that by the late 5th Century
BC Sicily had erupted in Warfare between
Carthage and the Greeks
soon it would resemble a piece of meat
being torn apart by two hungry dogs
the economy of the island suffered
Warlords established themselves as the
Tyrant rulers of its cities and banditry
and lawlessness spread
for much of these centuries of fighting
the carthaginians were happy to let the
wars with the Greeks Cimarron
the citizens of its capital never went
to war and so long as the peace and
comfort of their city was never
Disturbed it must have felt to them that
these wars were a very long way from
home
but the final episode of these conflicts
known as the seventh Sicilian War would
puncture this sense of invulnerability
that's because Carthage would find
itself in a life or death struggle with
a man who would bring the war home to
their Shores in dramatic fashion
he was a king of Syracuse a Greek
city-state on the Southeastern coast of
Sicily and his name was Agatha Cleese
agathicles began Life as a commoner In
the Sicilian colonies the son of a
Potter in the port city of Syracuse
at first he learned his father's trade
but soon entered the Army and Rose
through its ranks until he was able to
enact a military coup and seized the
Throne of the city in the year 317 BC
agathicles had a high opinion of himself
and as the Tyrant of Syracuse he minted
silver coins that portrayed himself as
the heir to Alexander the Great the
greatest of all the Greeks
and like Alexander Agatha Cleese had
dreams of Conquest
he soon set about subjugating cities all
around him as the historian diodorus of
Sicily recalls
Agatha Cleese began unhampered to
subject the city's and strongholds to
himself
mastering many of them quickly he made
his power secure
in fact he built up for himself a host
of allies ample revenues and a
considerable Army
he had picked a mercenary Force
comprising 10 000 foot soldiers and 3
500 horse
moreover he prepared a store of weapons
and of missiles of all kinds since he
knew that the carthaginians would
shortly wage war against him
as predicted it wasn't long before the
carthaginians began to see agathicles as
a serious threat
Carthage amassed a huge Army in its
usual way Gathering mercenaries and
levees from all of its territories and
allies Slingers spearmen Cavalry
elephants likely speaking a dozen
different languages and sailed all of
them to Sicily
on the way many of their ships were
wrecked in a storm but the force that
arrived was still easily enough to
overpower the Tyrant Agatha Cleese as
diodorous recounts
as a gothically you saw the forces of
the carthaginians were Superior to his
own he surmised that not a few of the
strongholds could go over to the
Phoenicians and also those of the cities
that were offended with him after a
stinging defeat on the hymera river in
central Sicily agathicles retreated East
to his port capital of Syracuse where
the carthaginians surrounded the city
and laid Siege
for agathicles it looks like all hope
was lost
but it's here in this desperate moment
that he decided on a truly daring course
of action
he hatched a plan to break free of The
Siege by ship set sail for Africa and
make a desperate strike at the heart of
his enemy the city of Carthage itself
when he saw that all his allies had
changed sides and that barbarians were
masters of almost all Sicily except
Syracuse and were far superior in both
land and sea forces he carried out an
undertaking that was unexpected and most
Reckless
he determined to leave an adequate
Garrison for the city to select those of
the soldiers who were fit and with these
to cross over into Libya
for he hoped that if he did this those
in Carthage who had been living
luxuriously in Long continued peace and
were therefore without experience in the
dangers of battle would easily be
defeated
when the carthaginians saw the Greek
Fleet leaving cyracuse they believed the
gothicles to be fleeing and they pursued
him
they chased the Greeks hurrying them
across the sea for hundreds of
kilometers pelting them with arrows and
sling stones
but luck was on the side of the Greeks
and Agatha Cleese and his soldiers were
able to land on the beaches of Africa
Agatha Cleese must have fear that his
soldiers would lose courage and attempt
to flee and so he ordered their ships to
be burned in an offering to the gods as
diodorous recounts
standing by the stern he paid the others
also to follow his example
then as all the captains threw in the
fire and the Flames quickly blazed High
the trumpeter sounded the signal for
battle and the Army raised the war cry
while altogether prayed for a safe
return home
this Agatha Cleese did for it was clear
that if the retreat to the ships was cut
off in Victory alone would they have
hope for safety nevertheless when all
the ships were aflame and the fire was
spreading widely Terror laid hold upon
the Sicilians as they considered the
vastness of the sea that separated them
from home
from the city walls of Carthage the
fires of the burning ships would have
been visible on the horizon and now fear
was beginning to spread Amaya citizens
for them war was something that happened
in other places
the city had never been significantly
threatened before and there were
virtually no forces there to defend it
panic in great confusion seized upon the
city the crowds rushed to the
marketplace and the Council of Elders
consulted what should be done
in fact there was no Army at hand that
could take the field against the enemy
the mass of the citizens who had no
experience in Warfare were already in
Despair and the enemy was thought to be
near the walls
for the first time the citizens of
Carthage would actually have to fight
they were conscripted on mass given long
Spears and shields perhaps given some
rudimentary training and along with the
small complement of City Guards marched
out to meet the Greeks in battle
the carthaginians hoped to make up for
the poor quality of their citizen troops
with sheer numbers and vastly
outnumbering Agatha Cleese they were
confident of Victory but that was not to
be the case
when they met the experienced and now
desperate Greeks smashed the citizen
soldiers of Carthage ran them off the
battlefield and flooded into their camp
and here diodrus writes that they made a
telling discovery
in the camp of the carthaginians were
found along with other Goods many wagons
in which were being transported more
than 20 000 pairs of manacles for the
carthaginians having expected to master
the Greeks easily had passed the word
along among themselves to take alive as
many possible and after shackling to
throw them into slave pens
with this Army defeated the city of
Carthage was now completely surrounded
by hostile forces and diodorous can't
help but comment on the ridiculous
nature of the situation
in Sicily the carthaginians who had
defeated agathicles in a great battle
were besieging Syracuse but in Libya
Agatha Cleese had brought the
carthaginians Under Siege
it's here that the carthaginians in
their desperation seem to have turned to
an ancient ritual that forms one of the
darkest and most controversial aspects
of their history
that is the right of child sacrifice
human sacrifice was at certain times a
feature of various Societies in the
ancient world rituals of this kind have
been attested in several indigenous
American societies and in the early
histories of Israel and Judah as well as
the cities of phenicia like tire and
sidon
the book of Kings records one king of
the levantine kingdom of Moab
sacrificing his firstborn child when a
war isn't going his way
in Ireland Britain and Northern Germany
during the Iron Age sacrificial victims
were ritually strangled and cast into
bogs where the acidic Waters mummified
them in a state of perfect preservation
this idea of a deadly exchange with the
gods seems to be one that recurs in
human psychology and has independently
Arisen in multiple cultures the idea
that if we want to ask the gods for a
great favor we have to give them
something truly precious in exchange and
what could be more precious than a human
life
with the writing down of the Hebrew
Bible and the law codes of Moses this
practice was condemned and outlawed in
much of the Levant and from then on
animals were sacrificed in the place of
human victims
entire and other Phoenician cities the
practice also seems to have died out in
the first millennium
but there is one place it seems to have
continued well into the second century
BC and that is Carthage
these were violent times when human life
was cheap but even so these rituals were
mentioned with some revulsion by several
ancient writers among them the Greek
philosopher Plato
with us for instance Human Sacrifice is
not legal but Unholy whereas the
carthaginians perform it as a thing they
account wholly in legal and that too
when some of them even sacrificed their
own Sons
at first these rituals seem to have been
an authentic sacrifice giving up the
life of one of your own children in the
hope of receiving favor from the gods
but before long wealthy carthaginians
found a way around this
in fact they seem to have developed a
Macabre industry a trade in other
people's children for sacrifice
the writer Plutarch describes this
system and gives a sense for the
atmosphere of these grisly rituals
those who had no children would buy
little ones from poor people and cut
their throats as if they were so many
lambs or young birds
meanwhile the mother stood by without a
tear or moan
but should she utter a single moan or
let fall a single tear she had to
Forfeit the money
and her child was sacrificed
nevertheless
and the whole area before the statue was
filled with a loud noise of flutes and
drums so that the cries of wailing
should not reach the ears of the people
for a long time it was assumed that
these stories were exaggerations pieces
of Greek propaganda designed to demonize
their enemies in Carthage but more
modern archaeological discoveries have
more or less confirmed that child
sacrifice did take place at least at
some times and at least by some people
in the city
large collections of buried urns
containing the cremated remains of
children have been found in large Temple
sites known as tofetz some of these
temples are exceedingly large with
collections of cremation urns exceeding
2000 in number
archeology has uncovered masks and
symbols at these sites incense burners
and other paraphernalia of ritual
suggesting that the ceremonies were
highly structured
it is worth being cautious with these
findings
at most of the sites analysis has shown
that the vast majority of these
children's remains are of stillborn
babies or babies that have died of
natural causes
at a time when child mortality has been
estimated at around 30 to 40 percent the
carthaginians may have considered the
tragedy of infant death to be a kind of
sacred sign
a human life being taken back by the
gods and the bodies of these children
were burned in the toffits as a result
the relative lack of children's remains
in the regular graveyards of the city
seem to show that these tofettes were at
least in part cremation sites for the
remains of children who had died of
other causes
but analysis of the ages of other
remains at other times don't seem to fit
with patterns of child mortality
however the ritual had begun at least in
the later years of the city it had
evolved into something much darker and
crueler
the inscriptions at these later sites of
sacrifice left over the cremation urns
don't seem to leave much room for
interpretation as this typical example
shows
lady tenet
and Lord Bal hamon the thing that Irish
son of bodashtot son of balshalem maker
of stridgels vowed because the Lord
heard his voice
there are countless of these
inscriptions and they all follow this
pattern the child was not offered up
front but was promised in advance if the
gods came through on their request the
Greek historian clay tarkus seems to
confirm this order of events
the Phoenicians and above all the
carthaginians whenever they were eager
for a great thing to succeed made a vow
by one of their children
if they would receive the desired things
they would sacrifice to the Gods
a bronze Kronos having been erected by
them stretched out upward hands over a
bronze oven to burn the child the flame
of the burning child reached its body
until the limbs having shriveled up and
smiling mouth appeared to be almost
laughing
it would slip into the oven
we can't imagine the kinds of things
people might have asked for in exchange
for these sacrifices
perhaps in some instances we can imagine
the ritual was performed out of
desperation an extreme measure
other times perhaps the wishes were
trivial good weather on a journey maybe
good fortune and wealth in the year to
come or the downfall of a business rival
whatever their wish was it seems that if
it went on to come true the child's fate
would be sealed
with only fragmentary second-hand
accounts and the little that can be
gleaned from archaeological sites we're
left guessing about the questions that
desperately need answers how widespread
this practice was in society why and
when people engaged in it and how the
majority of carthaginian citizens felt
about it
with the army of agathicles drawing near
and their last citizen Defenders
defeated in the field the carthaginians
began to believe that their gods must be
angry with them and at least some people
in the city believed that it was this
practice of sacrificing the children of
the poor instead of their own that was
to blame as deodorus of Sicily recounts
they also alleged that Cronus had turned
against them as in former times they had
been accustomed to sacrifice to this God
the noblest of their sons but more
recently secretly buying and nurturing
children they had sent these to the
sacrifice
when they had given thought to these
things and saw their enemy encount
before their walls they were filled with
superstitious dread for they believed
that they had neglected the honors of
the gods that had been established by
their fathers in their Zeal to make
amends for their Omission they selected
200 of the noblest children and
sacrificed them publicly and others who
were under suspicions sacrificed
themselves voluntarily in number not
less than 300.
in this time of peril the citizens of
Carthage reverted to a kind of suicidal
religious fundamentalism but this would
not be the end of the city
Agatha Cleese rampaged around the
countryside of Carthage for years
but the city's formidable triple wall
defenses would keep him at Bay and soon
the Greek king ran out of steam
in his absence some of his Sicilian
vassals were taking the opportunity to
declare independence
he hurried back home leaving his
inexperienced son in charge of his army
who was easily outmaneuvered by
carthaginian generals
by the time Agatha Cleese returned to
Africa he saw that the situation had
become untenable and he fled back home
to Sicily
but his achievements had been
significant he had left a lasting
impression on the people of Carthage
laid waste to their Countryside
terrified them so deeply that they had
slaughtered their own children and
likely left them on the brink of
bankruptcy
peace treaty in 307 BC essentially
returned the situation to exactly how it
had been before the war started
the example of agathicles of a daring
strike at the heart of your enemy right
at the moment they least expect it was
an example that later carthaginian
generals would remember and learn from
but it was also an episode that other
powers in the region paid particular
attention to
Carthage had once been considered the
Region's major power but a small Greek
army had come within a hair's breadth of
bringing it to its knees
the historian Plutarch puts it bluntly
in the mouth of one of his characters
for who could keep his hands off Libya
or Carthage when that City got within
his reach a city which our gothically's
slipping stealthily out of Syracuse and
crossing the sea with only a few ships
narrowly mistaking
the first who would seek to take
advantage of this perceived weakness was
a Greek king named piris
piris was the king of the Greek Kingdom
of epidos around what is today Southern
Albania
his name meant fiery or red-haired
coming from the same root as the English
word pyre
and Plutarch recalls that he seems to
have suffered from some kind of
Developmental disorder that fused
together the teeth of his upper jaw
giving him an unsettling look
in the aspect of his countenance Paris
had more of the terror than of the
Majesty of kingly power
he had not many teeth but his upper jaw
was one continuous bone on which the
usual intervals between the teeth were
indicated by slight depressions
just like Agatha Cleese piris had an
immensely high opinion of himself and
fancied himself as the inheritor of the
legacy of Alexander
in his later life he styled himself as a
hero of the Hellenic world the defender
of everything Greek and right at that
moment the Greeks who needed the most
defending were the beleaguered colonies
in southern Italy the region known as
megali Halas or greater Greece
these city-states were suddenly being
menaced by a powerful new force in the
region a people from the river Plains of
central Italy that the Greeks considered
to be barbarians and that had recently
emerged as something of a regional
superpower
this was the once small and
insignificant city-state Republic of
Rome
throughout the 4th Century BC this
bizarre Republic had begun expanding
into the Hinterlands of its region of
Latium and brought a number of other
cities under its control
from there they had managed to upset the
Power Balance of central Italy and
toppled a number of well-established
Rivals absorbing all of Latium and the
region of Campania
and wherever they went the Romans took a
remarkably clever and pragmatic approach
to absorbing other peoples into their
society
World Empires like Carthage kept full
citizenship only for the people living
in their home City Rome was far more
generous with citizenship
unlike the armies of Carthage Rome's
Legions were made up of Citizen soldiers
and with every free man now a citizen
they were able to draw on vast reserves
of manpower
as Rome grew in size and influence
Carthage took notice
about 160 years after the first treaty
they had signed they penned a new
expanded agreement with Rome
this new treaty added the condition that
Rome would not try to found any cities
in carthaginian territory suggesting
that Roman expansion had become at least
a small concern for the Region's major
power
but for the most part relations between
Rome and Carthage were friendly if
suspicious
Carthage welcomed The Rise of Rome as a
potential ally against their Mutual
enemies the Greeks and one District of
the city of Rome was known as the vikas
Africa or African quarter suggesting
that a population of carthaginian
merchants already lived and traded in
the city
it seems Carthage viewed Rome not as an
unwelcome rival but as a new potential
source of customers
but for the Greek colonies of southern
Italy Rome was a voracious new predator
as Roman power expanded the Greeks found
themselves surrounded and many of them
began sending out letters of distress to
the fiery Greek king piris
one of these colonies was the city of
Tarentum as Plutarch recalls
the Romans were at war with the people
of torrentum who being able neither to
carry on the war nor put an end to it
wish to make Pirates their leader and
summon him to the war believing him to
be a most formidable genre
piris couldn't resist this opportunity
to position himself as the Valiant
defender of Greek civilization against
these Latin barbarians
he gathered an armada and a large army
complete with 20 war elephants and in
the year 280 BC he sailed to Southern
Italy in full force
himself a sophisticated Greek piris
expected to meet an unruly Barbarian
horde on the battlefield but Roman
troops were by now toughened from their
long Wars of expansion in Italy and they
were already exhibiting the kind of
organization that would one day make
them famous
when he learned that the Romans were
near and laying camped on the further
side of the river Cyrus he rode up to
the river to get a view of them and when
he observed their discipline the
appointment of their watches their order
and the general arrangement of their
camp
he was amazed and said to the friend
that was nearest him
the discipline of these barbarians is
not barbarous
but these early Roman Legions were still
no match for Greek phalanxes and the
site of purus's elephants terrified the
Roman horses
together
Paris defeated the Romans in two battles
at heraklia and at auskalum in the year
279 BC and he believed that Rome must
soon concede the war and agree to the
terms of his demands
but slightly to the bemusement of piris
Rome simply refused to admit defeat
this refusal to ever sue for peace would
become something of a Roman Hallmark
some have argued that Rome's very nature
as a citizen democracy actually
contributed to their immense doggedness
in Warfare
their leaders were politicians and
existed in a state of constant
competition with each other for the
support of the voting public
any politician who signed a damaging
peace treaty could be eviscerated in the
Senate as a coward a fool or even a
traitor this meant that Roman Senators
would often overwhelmingly vote to
continue a war rather than admit defeat
this will to continue along with their
large reserves of Citizen Manpower meant
that Rome could often absorb terrific
defeats losing whole armies and simply
keep going
this often had the effect of Simply
grinding down their enemies will to
fight
according to Plutarch who was fond of
inventing dialogue for his historical
characters piris made the following quip
after his third Victory with Rome
we are told that Paris said to one who
was congratulating him on his victory if
we are victorious in one more battle
with the Romans we shall be utterly
ruined for he had lost great part of the
forces with which he came and all his
friends and Generals except a few
he had no others who he could summon
from home and he saw that his allies in
Italy were becoming indifferent while
the army of the Romans as if from a
fountain gushing forth indoors was
easily in speedily filled up again
after this series of pyrrhic Victories
piris soon realized the conquest of
Italy would elude him he came within
miles of Rome but the tall servian walls
of the city meant that his beleaguered
Force had no hope of capturing it
still he couldn't bear the thought of
returning home empty-handed
piris decided that he would head to
Sicily and see if he could have any more
success helping the Greek colonies there
fight against the carthaginians
he arrived in the Greek Town of Syracuse
to a hero's welcome every Greek colony
on the island sent troops to fill his
army and Pierce would find the
carthaginian forces on Sicily to be a
much softer Target than the legions of
Rome
the carthaginian response to Paris
couldn't have been more different to the
Romans
with little desire to be dragged back
into another war in Sicily they offered
to pay him off generously to leave them
alone but piris refused as Plutarch
describes
when the carthaginians were inclined to
come to terms and were willing to pay
him money and send him ships he replied
to them his heart being set on greater
things that there could be no settlement
or friendship between himself and them
unless they abandoned all Sicily
but Sicily too eventually defeated him
after years of war his men were tired
the carthaginians and Romans were now
working together
so he faced the powerful armies of Rome
on land and the vast Navy of Carthage by
sea
after finally meeting with defeat in
southern Italy he cut his losses and
sailed for home with little to show for
his years of war
as he sailed away Plutarch imagines
piris reflecting on the situation he has
left behind
he could not master Sicily which was
like a storm tossed ship but desired to
leave her and it is said that at the
time of his departure piris looked back
at the island and said to those about
him my friend what a wrestling ground
for carthaginians and Romans we are
leaving behind us
paris's campaign had ended in failure
with him gone Rome quickly swept over
the remaining Greek city-states of Italy
and solidified its hold on the south of
their peninsula
the Romans built Roads connecting these
wealthy Greek cities to the Roman
Network and used the treasure They
seized to build a grand series of new
temples in the capital as well as an
enormous second Aqueduct for Rome the
aqua aniovatus
meanwhile Carthage reclaimed many of the
cities that piris had taken in Sicily
but without a common enemy the twin
powers of Carthage and Rome were now
butting up against each other
by the year 270 BC Rome had captured the
city of regium right across the Straits
of Messina
they could now look over the water and
gazed directly at the coast of Sicily
the wrestling ground that piras had left
behind in Sicily would set the stage for
the next dramatic period of
Mediterranean history
it was a stage that would see a conflict
unfold there would dwarf the Sicilian
Wars for intensity and scale they would
last for a hundred years that would
bring both powers to the brink of
bankruptcy and cost more than a million
lives
this was the beginning of the Punic Wars
the word Punic comes from Latin and is a
mutation of the Greek word fornike or
Phoenician and at this time the Romans
had come to use it to describe the
phoenician's superpower of Carthage that
sat facing them only three days Voyage
away on the other side of the sea
the historian Cassius Dio summarizes the
situation as both the powers of Rome and
Carthage slid towards War
the carthaginians who had long been
powerful and the Romans who were now
growing more rapidly stronger kept
viewing each other with jealousy
they were led into war partly by the
desire of continually acquiring more and
partly also by fear
it was a chance incident that broke
their truce and plunged them into war
the main source for almost every aspect
of the first Punic War is the historian
polybius a Greek who was sent to Rome in
167 BC as a hostage
polybius was writing about the events of
the first Punic War a century after they
took place but he was meticulous in his
research and traveled widely Gathering
as much first-hand knowledge and
archival material as he could and as a
Greek he was something of an outsider in
Rome meaning that his portrayal of the
war is considered to be relatively
even-handed
the story that polybius tells begins in
the volcanic island of Sicily where
around the beginning of the 3rd Century
BC trouble was once again threatening to
erupt
at this time Sicily had something of the
Wild West about it large parts of it
were Lawless and fell between the
influences of Carthage and the Greeks
both sides often used mercenaries to
fight for them but when a particular war
was finished it wasn't always so easy to
get rid of these bands of rough and
Violent Men
one such band were a group of mostly
Southern Italians who called themselves
the mamateans or the sons of Mars the
Roman God of War
in the past they had been hired by
agathicles to fight Carthage in Sicily
but when the Tyrant of Syracuse had died
they found themselves out of work
the mamateans wandered the island for
some time likely engaging in theft and
Petty banditry to survive until they
reached the walled Greek Town of Messina
Messina was a small settlement on the
northeastern tip of Sicily with the
shadow of Mount Etna looming Over the
Horizon
and its location was of great strategic
importance
that's because Messina was one side of
the narrowest crossing point between
Sicily and Italy
standing on the shore there you can see
the Italian Mainland just over the water
and a ship could make the crossing in
under 30 minutes
anyone who controlled Messina would also
control this Crossing and this meant
that both Carthage and Rome were anxious
about the city's future
when the band of mamateans arrived in
Messina they must have made quite a
sorry sight and the people of the city
originally took pity on them they took
them in and even gave them shelter in
their own homes
but soon these hired swords became
restless and jealous of the people's
comfortable lives
in fact they began to plot to seize the
city for themselves
polybius recounts what happened next
certain companions serving under
agathicles had long cast Covetous eyes
on the beauty and prosperity of Messina
and they Avail themselves as the first
opportunity to capture it by treachery
after being admitted as friends and
occupying the city they first expelled
or massacred the citizens and then took
possession of the wives and families of
the dispossessed victims
they next divided among themselves the
land and all other property
for the next 20 years or so the
mamateans would run Messina as a kind of
pirate Fortress
they would use it as a base to conduct
raids on nearby towns and Villages and
to Rob ships that sailed through the
narrow Straits
but soon the last remaining Greek king
in Sicily a king of Syracuse named yero
had had enough
in the year 265 BC he moved to attack
the city of Messina to Stamp Out These
Troublesome Pirates
fearing execution for their crimes the
mamateans played the only card left to
them trading on the Strategic importance
of the city
they sent out requests for help to both
of the big players in the region to Rome
and to Carthage
the carthaginians being closer came to
their help first delighted as always to
kick sand in the face of the Greeks
they moved a small army into Messina and
helped the mamateans to defend it
this was just the latest move in the
nearly two Century chess game between
Carthage and the Greeks of Sicily but to
the Romans it was a worrying move
with control of the crossing over to
Italy the Romans began to fear that
Carthage was plotting an invasion of the
Mainland as polybius recalls
the Romans saw all this and felt that it
was absolutely necessary not to let
Messina slip or allow the carthaginians
to secure what would be like a bridge to
enable them to cross into Italy
the Roman senate was bitterly divided on
what to do with many expressing disgust
at coming to the aid of what amounted to
a band of pirates
but eventually their fears won out
they voted to send a force to Messina to
secure the crossing led by a Consul
named appius Claudius
Rome was an inland City situated on the
river Tiber and so the Romans were not a
naturally seagulling people
with few ships of their own they
borrowed as many as they could from the
coastal cities of southern Italy
when they first took in hand to send
troops across to Messina they not only
had no decked vessels but no warships at
all not so much as a single Galley but
they borrowed quinquareems and trains
from tarantum and lochry and even from
Alaya and neapolis
the Romans under the command of appius
successfully made the short Crossing in
264 BC catching the powerful
carthaginian navy off guard
when they arrived in Messina the Italian
mamateans
ousted the carthaginians who had come to
their aid and welcomed the Roman army
into the town in their place
the Roman capture of Messina immediately
shifted the balance of power in Sicily
the Greeks of Syracuse formed a hasty
alliance with their ancient enemies in
Carthage overturning two centuries of
War to repel this new Invader but it was
no good
the Roman Commander appius descended on
Syracuse with lightning speed as
polybius writes
having succeeded in engaging the enemy
thenceforth he scoured the territory of
Syracuse and her allies with impunity
and laid it waste without finding anyone
to dispute the possession of the Open
Country with him and finally he sat down
before Syracuse itself
and laid Siege to it
King hero saw no other way out
he surrendered
switched sides and swore allegiance to
the Romans
this was the end of the last independent
Greek States in Italy and Sicily and the
future of the Mediterranean would now be
decided by either Carthage or Rome
both sides now marched to war
in this first Punic War the
carthaginians were clearly concerned
they drew up a large army of Celts
iberians and other peoples and
dispatched it to Sicily
but they were also confident in their
overall strategy which had served them
well in previous Sicilian Wars
while the warships of Carthage commanded
the waves their trading empire would
continue to fill their treasury with
gold and that meant there would always
be soldiers ready to fight for them
and at first it seemed the Romans had no
hope of changing this situation they had
virtually no Navy and their own
shipbuilding technology lagged behind
perhaps by centuries
as the historian polybius writes
yet so long as the carthaginians were an
undisturbed command of the sea the
balance of success could not incline
decisively in their favor so they took
upon themselves there and then to meet
the carthaginians at Sea on which they
had for Generations held Undisputed
Supremacy
the carthaginian Navy benefited from a
thousand years of Phoenician
shipbuilding and sailing tradition but
their centuries of relatively
unchallenged dominance of the sea had
also made them somewhat complacent
their method of fighting on the water
was based mostly on the use of heavy
bronze Rams fixed to the front of their
ships
The Phoenician Sailors relied on
outmaneuvering their enemies on the
waves with their Superior sailing
drawing close with their oars and
crashing into the sides of enemy ships
with these Rams striking them in the
hulls below the water line
it was a method of warfare that had
remained unchanged for the last 500
years and the carthaginians were among
the best in the world at this tricky way
of fighting
but soon the Romans would come across a
stroke of good luck
after one Skirmish on the sea a
carthaginian galley had run aground on
the shores of Italy
it was a once in a lifetime opportunity
to learn what made the carthaginian Navy
so effective
the Romans rushed to secure the vessel
to haul it away and study its Secrets as
polybius records
the carthaginians having put to Sea in
the strait to attack a decked vessel of
theirs charged so furiously that it ran
aground and falling into the hands of
the Romans served them as a model on
which they constructed their whole Fleet
and if this had not happened it is clear
that they would have been completely
hindered from carrying out their design
what the Romans found on this vessel
would have intrigued and excited them
at that time the carthaginians were
legendary not just for their sailing and
the size of their Fleet but also how
quickly they could build ships
the writer Pliny the Elder recounts what
was possible in those days
Pisa relates the 220 ships were wholly
constructed in 45 days
in the Second Punic War 2 the fleet was
at Sea the 40th Day after the acts had
been put to the tree
this was long considered to be an
exaggeration by ancient writers but the
discovery of The Phoenician shipwreck
known as the marsala ship has thrown
light on how this kind of mass
manufacturer could actually have been
possible
when the wreck was discovered
archaeologists found that the ship Had
Each section of its Hull marked with
certain Phoenician letters
it's thought that these sections would
have been built separately mass produced
in separate factories and then brought
together in their final location with a
level of coordination that would not be
seen again before the Industrial
Revolution
these ships were a kind of ancient flat
pack furniture
armed with this new knowledge the Romans
began the process of copying the
carthaginian ship exactly but they
didn't do very well
in their first engagement with Carthage
the inferior mobility of these Roman
ships and the inexperience of their
Sailors meant that a squadron of 17
Roman vessels was destroyed easily
outmaneuvered by the Phoenicians and
dealt death Blows By Their Rams
following this the Romans began to
change their tactics
getting the hang of the complicated
business of outmaneuvering and ramming
enemy ships would take too long and so
they tried to bring the battles at Sea
into more familiar territory
to do this they developed an ingenious
new technology
it was a kind of boarding bridge that
they called a corvus the Latin word for
Crow
these were raised like a drawbridge at
the front of the ship and when they drew
near to an enemy vessel these gangplanks
would have dropped down onto the enemy
death where a metal Spike on the
underside
would drive its way into the wood
these Bridges would now hold the two
ships together neutralizing the Speed
and Agility of the carthaginian vessels
preventing them from ramming and
allowing the Roman legionaries to flood
on board
it was a crude but surprisingly
effective tactic
the Romans kept their new inventions
hidden and now with a secret Naval
Weapon of their own they risked a
large-scale confrontation on the sea
Virginian fleet was busy plundering at a
place called Malay on the coast of
Northern Sicily when they saw the Roman
sails on the horizon
they were delighted that their enemies
had finally risked a battle and were
supremely confident of sending the whole
Fleet of this Troublesome Italian power
straight to the bottom of the ocean
polybius recounts what happened next
no sooner did the carthaginians cite him
than with joy they put to sea with 130
sale feeling Supreme contempt for the
Roman ignorance of seamanship
accordingly they all sailed with their
prows directed straight at their enemy
they did not think the engagement worth
even the trouble of ranging their ships
in any order
when they neared the enemy they saw the
crows raised Aloft on the prowse of
several ships the carthaginians were for
a time in a state of perplexity for they
were quite strangers to such
contrivances as these engines feeling
however a complete contempt for their
opponent they charged without flinching
but as soon as they came to Close
Quarters their ships were invariably
tightly grappled by these machines the
enemy boarded by means of the crows and
engaged them on their decks and in the
end some of the carthaginians were cut
down while others surrendered in
bewildered Terror at the battle in which
they found themselves engaged which
eventually became exactly like a land
fight eventually the carthaginians
turned and fled bewildered the novelty
of the occurrence and were the loss of
50 ships
for Carthage this was an utter disaster
flying high from their successes the
Romans soon organized invasions of the
islands of Sardinia and Corsica
carthaginian possessions for centuries
that had never been seriously threatened
they even organized an invasion of North
Africa itself hoping to follow in the
footsteps of Agatha Cleese and March on
the capital of Carthage
for the carthaginians things were
starting to get out of hand
as the Roman Invasion Force descended
upon the coast Carthage sent out the
entirety of its Fleet to meet them on
the Open Sea
polybius recounts that as they cited the
Roman sails on the horizon the
commanders of Carthage spoke to their
sailors and soldiers and vocalized a
fear that must have been on the lips of
every man and woman in The Phoenician
territories that this war was now in
danger of coming home
meanwhile the carthaginian commanders
had briefly addressed their man
they pointed out to them that victory in
this battle would ensure that the war in
the future was confined to the question
of the possession of Sicily while if
they were beaten they would have
Hereafter to fight for their native land
and for all that they held dear
polybius records that more than 600
ships came together in the battle that
ensued by the time he was writing his
history of the Punic Wars more than a
hundred years later the size of Warships
had dramatically increased and so he
likely wildly overestimates the number
of men involved putting it at well over
three hundred thousand nevertheless the
battle was enormous and probably
involved at least 120 000 Sailors
soldiers rowers and Marines
the vast Battlefield would have devolved
into a chaos of clashing oars and Rams
shouting man and the thud of the corvus
bridges crushing down onto the decks the
Clashing of Shields and swords the
crashing of waves and the shrieking of
gulls overhead
by the end of the day the result of the
battle was a decisive defeat for the
carthaginians
with the fleet of Carthage scattered the
Romans successfully made the Crossing
into Africa and landed on the peninsula
of Cape Bonn on the other side of the
Bay from the city
the citizens of Carthage would now have
been able to see the campfires of the
Roman army in the distance at night
some of the city's oldest residents
would still have remembered when the
army of agathicles had menaced the city
only half a century before when they had
watched those ships burning on the
shoreline
the carthaginians had had enough
they asked the Romans for a peace treaty
to sign but the Roman demands were so
punishing that the carthaginians even in
their desperate State could not accept
it and so the war dragged on
but the Romans like agathicles found
themselves unable to take the city of
Carthage
the Roman expeditionary Force sent to
capture the city was beaten disastrously
by a smaller carthaginian Army at the
Battle of Tunis and the Roman Consul
leading it was captured and killed
in this way the fortunes of each side
ticked back and forth like a pendulum
another naval battle at Cape hermayum
saw another Roman Victory and another
hundred carthaginian ships sunk but the
Romans had no time to celebrate
on its return Voyage Home the Victorious
Roman fleet was hit by a devastating
storm as polybius records
the disaster was indeed extreme for out
of their 364 vessels 80 only Remain the
rest were either swamped or driven by
the surf upon the rocks and Headlands
where they went to pieces and filled all
the Seaboard with corpses and wreckage
no greater catastrophe is to be found in
all history as befalling a fleet at one
time
284 ships were lost with an estimated 60
000 Sailors sinking to the Bottom of the
Sea
it was among the worst Naval disasters
in history
some historians have speculated that the
Romans secret weapon the corvus boarding
Bridges may have actually made their
ships top heavy and prone to capsizing
in stormy conditions
after this disaster there are no
mentions of the corvus ever being used
again on Roman ships
the war would drag on for another 14
years with most of the fighting taking
place in Sicily and the surrounding Seas
but by the year 241 BC Carthage was
spent
the carthaginian Senate ordered their
General in Sicily to sign whatever peace
treaty the Romans demanded no matter how
punishing
this General was a man named Hamilton
Barker
he was proud a competent General and he
had been winning some of his battles in
Sicily he believed that signing such a
punishing treaty was Madness and so he
refused the order to negotiate
in his place the Senate sent a more
Junior Commander to capitulate to Rome
the first Punic War ended in the year
241 BC 23 years after it had begun with
the signing of the Treaty of lutashus
it was one of the longest continuous
Wars to ever take place in the ancient
world
is it exhausted both Rome and Carthage
and driven them both to the brink of
bankruptcy
but Rome as the Victor had at least
gained something from all the years of
carnage
under the terms of the treaty Carthage
was forced to give up all its remaining
territory in Sicily to Rome and possibly
the island of Corsica too
Carthage was forced to release all Roman
prisoners without Ransom while Hefty
ransoms were charged for any
carthaginian held by Rome
and they were forced to pay a staggering
82 tons of silver in reparations to Rome
over the next 10 years
all of this meant that Carthage could no
longer afford to pay its armies
many of these were foreign mercenaries
that it was already in debt to and in
the same year as the treaty was signed a
large band of these mercenaries around
twenty thousand men or so camped outside
the city itself and refused to budge
until they got paid
but the state was all but bankrupt
when the carthaginian Senate delayed in
paying them they mutinied and began
looting and burning the countryside
while the two decades of War had been
tough on the citizens of Carthage it had
been even tougher on the rural regions
of Africa it ruled over
carthaginian provinces like Libya had
sent huge numbers of men to fight for
Carthage and they were subjected to
punishing taxes to pay for it all
their resentment had been slowly
building and now it boiled over
when news of this Army of rioting
mercenaries reached some of these
discontented cities they saw their
chance to free themselves of the rule of
Carthage entirely
many of them rebelled and soon Carthage
was engulfed in a civil war
it looked for the first time like the
entire Empire might come apart at the
seams as polybius writes
for three years and about four months
did The Mercenaries maintain a war
against the carthaginians which far
surpassed any that I have heard of for
cruelty and inhumanity the many battles
in which they have been engaged at Sea
had naturally left them ill-supplied
with arms Sailors and vessels they had
no store of Provisions ready and no
expectation whatever of external
assistance from friends or Allies
they were indeed now thoroughly taught
the difference between a foreign war
carried on Beyond the Seas and the
domestic insurrection
the Civil War that followed which would
become known as the mercenary War would
unfold with unparalleled brutality
the bodies of crucified Rebels would
have become a regular site along the
roads the instability caused a famine
and Carthage was forced to raise an army
from its citizens forcing Ordinary
People in the capital to fight
the man tasked by the carthaginian
Senate with carrying out the Civil War
was the proud General hamalkar Barker
the man who had refused to sign the
treaty with Rome
throughout these years of violence he
would have seen his homeland burning his
people starving and dying and all this
time he nursed his hatred for his Roman
enemies
at enormous cost Hamel car Barker would
eventually crush the rebels and he
sometimes did this quite literally
many insurgents captured in the later
years of the war were executed beneath
the feet of carthage's elephants the
ultimate living symbol of the Empire's
power
after four years of Civil War some
measure of order returned to the
scorched Countryside
the Empire of Carthage had survived but
they were narrow in an even worse State
than before
meanwhile the Romans had spent four
years recovering and drawing wealth from
their new lands in Sicily and Corsica at
carthage's time of weakness Rome moved
to capture the island of Sardinia II
which had escaped its grasp during the
war and was now rebelling against
carthage's weakened rule
the carthaginians could do nothing to
stop them as polybius recalls
when the carthaginians expressed
indignation of this on the ground that
the lordship over Sardinia more properly
belonged to them the Romans voted to
declare war against them the
carthaginians however having just had an
almost miraculous escape from
annihilation in the recent Civil War
yielded to the necessities of the hour
and not only abandoned Sardinia but they
paid the Romans 1200 talents into the
bargain that they might not be obliged
to undertake the war for the present the
new balance of power in the
Mediterranean was clear Carthage was now
a hollowed-out husk
if they were to reclaim any of the power
that they had once held the next
generation of carthaginian military
leaders would need to produce a general
of such genius that he could turn around
the hopes and fortunes of this
floundering Empire
a general that would conduct a campaign
so daring that it is still studied in
military academies to this day
that man would bear a name that
information meant by the grace of Baal
his name was Hannibal
Hannibal was the son of the general
hamalkar Barker
when the first Punic War ended he was a
boy of only six years old and he would
have watched with the formative Mind of
a child as the world he knew was torn
apart by violence and his father
struggled to end the rebellions
when Rome had snatched away the island
of Sardinia Carthage lost the last of
its profitable Central Mediterranean
islands and with the Empire so weakened
its economy was in free fall
if it was to write itself Carthage would
need to find vast resources of minerals
metals and people
and Hannibal's father knew that the only
way these could be found was by
expanding carthage's last remaining
overseas territories
these were in southern Spain as polybius
writes
Hamilton with the anger felt by all his
compatriots at this last outrage as soon
as he had finally crushed the Mutiny of
mercenaries and secured the safety of
his country at once through all his
efforts into the conquest of Spain
hamoka gathered an army and set out for
the Spanish colonies
Rome now ruled the Seas and carthage's
navy was so weakened that he was unable
to travel the whole way to Spain by ship
instead he had to March all the way
across North Africa and Ferry his army
across the sea at the narrow Straits of
Gibraltar
when he left
he took his own young son Hannibal with
him to teach the boy The Art of War and
to ensure that he passed on his burning
hatred for Rome
at the time when his father was about to
start with his army on his expedition to
Spain Hannibal then nine years of age
was standing by the altar while hamelkar
was sacrificing to his use his father
took him by the hand led him up to the
Altar and made him lay his hand on the
victim and swear never to be the friend
of the Romans he made his own son
Hannibal such an enemy of Rome that none
could be more bitter
despite the weakened state of Carthage
hamalkar succeeded in conquering the
Celtic tribes of Spain he built a new
city there that became known as New
Carthage now the southern Spanish city
of Cartagena
while the young boy Hannibal grew up in
Spain he would have likely visited the
Temple of melkart or Hercules in gardis
that temple with the golden Olive Tree
at its Center
he would have heard stories about
Hercules and his legendary journey over
the Alps herding the cattle of garyon
the Giant perhaps he would have even
learned the history of the Greek Agatha
Cleaves and his daring strike right at
the heart of his stronger enemy and all
this while he would have dreamed of one
day making his own mark on history
when his father hamalkar died and his
successor was assassinated it would soon
fall to the young Hannibal to lead the
carthaginian armies in Spain
he continued his father's work of
expanding their territories pushing back
the local Celtic tribes who opposed him
and it's clear he developed a flare for
Warfare
by the time he was 27 Hannibal
controlled more than half of the Iberian
Peninsula a vast and Wealthy territory
of nearly a quarter million square
kilometers
from his father he had inherited an army
of sixty thousand battle-hardened troops
the best in the Empire and a stable of
200 war elephants
he had also forged alliances with a
number of Celtic tribes in Spain that he
knew would come to his Aid if needed
he was now at the head of the wealthiest
and most powerful province of the empire
Hannibal and his father's success in
Spain restored the lifeblood of Carthage
and Silva once again flowed through the
empire
it's said that just one Spanish mine in
the region of bay Bello with its shafts
running more than two kilometers into
the Mountainside was producing nearly a
thousand kilograms of silver each week
for Hannibal's Treasury
analysis shows that the coins being
minted in Spain at this time were of an
exceptionally high content of silver
while those being minted back in
Carthage were still watered down with
cheaper metals
all of this meant that Hannibal was
beginning to feel increasingly confident
about testing the bounds of what he
could get away with both with the Senate
back in Carthage and with his sworn
enemy of Rome
the Roman poet sileus italicus gives one
description of his character
he was won by Nature eager for Action
yet an oath breaker cunning beyond all
though of questionable fairness armed he
was no respecter of the Gods bold to do
wrong scorning the virtues of peace and
with a thirst for human blood alive in
his deepest marrow above all in the
flower of his youth he longed to erase
that defeat a generation's shame and
drowned their peace treaty Deep In the
Sicilian sea
the location for the flashpoint that
would spark the Second Punic War was the
town of saguntum just north of what is
today Valencia in southern Spain
saguntum was a Roman Ally and Rome had
been watching with concern as carthage's
Spanish borders edged ever closer
Rome had made it very clear that they
would not tolerate a carthaginian attack
on the city of segundum
but Hannibal was willing to call their
Bluff
in the year 219 BC at the age of 28 he
led his Army against the city and put it
under siege
the fighting didn't go smoothly the
people of saguntum put up a fierce
defense from their walls and Hannibal
was even wounded in the thigh by a
javelin
but his move to take the city was a
clear spit in the eye of the Romans
when they heard about what was happening
Rome dispatched some envoys who turned
up at Hannibal's Siege camp at segundum
and demanded to speak with him
he had his man that sends them away
telling them that he was too busy to
talk to them
the Romans must have left seething with
rage
back in Carthage news of Hannibal's
actions were likely met with excitement
by his supporters and with a frenzy of
dismay by others
one of his great opponents a man named
Hano is supposed to have delivered a
blistering speech against him in the
carthaginian Senate the words of which
the later Roman historian Livi imagines
as long as any single representative of
the blood and name of Barker survives
our treaty with Rome will never remain
unimpelled you have sent to the Army as
though supplying fuel to fire a young
man who is consumed with a passion for
Sovereign power and who recognizes that
the only way to it lies in passing his
life surrounded by armed Legions and
perpetually stirring up fresh Wars it is
against Carthage that Hannibal is now
bringing up his Towers it is Carthage
whose walls he is shaking with his
battering rams the ruins of saguntum
will fall on our heads and the war which
has begun with segundum will have to be
carried on with Rome
but Hannibal also had plenty of
supporters and even his strongest
opponents in the Senate found themselves
in something of a bind
many would have likely preferred to have
Hannibal arrested and his armies given
to some more predictable General but in
truth they had no idea how to do this
Hannibal's soldiers were loyal to him
and any move against him would cause a
civil war that could lose Carthage all
of the wealthy Spanish provinces on
which their entire economy now rested
but the Romans too were Paralyzed by
indecision for the eight months of the
siege of segundum Rome did nothing but
complain
when Hannibal finally took the city the
Romans sent a delegation of ambassadors
to Africa to demand an explanation
the clouds of War were once again
gathering over the sea
when these men arrived they spoke before
the carthaginian Senate and demanded to
know whether Hannibal's capture of
saguntum was the official policy of
Carthage or just the work of one Rogue
General
if he had acted alone they demanded that
Hannibal be arrested and handed over for
punishment
if Carthage failed to do that Rome would
declare war
the historian Appian described this
moment as the carthaginian Senate made
its Choice
the Romans now sent ambassadors to
Carthage to demand that Hannibal should
be delivered up to them as a violator of
the treaty
they will not give him up war was to be
declared forth with
the chief of the embassy pointed to the
fold of his togar and smiling said here
carthaginians I bring you peace or War
you may take whichever you choose the
latter replied you may give us whichever
you like
when the Romans offered War they all
cried out we accept it
the poet sileus italicus writing some
centuries after the conflict gives an
even more florid rendition
he gestured to them that he carried War
and Peace In His Hands demanding they
choose and when the Senators refused to
accept either he replied shaking his
robes as if pouring out battle and
ruined from his arms take War unhappy
Libya with an outcome like the first
the Roman historian Levy describes the
conflict that ensued in the following
terms
the most memorable of all wars ever
waged the war that is which under the
leadership of Hannibal the carthaginians
waged with the Roman people for neither
have Stakes or nations met in arms
possessed of ampler resources
nor was their own might in power ever so
great
growing up among the fires of Civil War
Hannibal had learned never to let your
Homeland become a battlefield he knew
that if he waited in Spain his lands
would soon become host to a Roman
Invasion Force his Fields would burn his
Silver Mines would dry up and his people
would suffer
and so he decided to take his War to
Rome
he withdrew to his capital of New
Carthage for the winter to prepare and
plan
and here Livy describes him giving the
following speech to his soldiers
you are on the eve of an expedition that
will carry you far afield and it is
uncertain when you will see again your
homes with the first signs of spring
with Heaven's good help we may begin a
war that shall bring us vast Renown and
treasure
the journey from new Carthage to Italy
was one of about 1500 kilometers so
Hannibal knew that a long and dangerous
March awaited him once the spring
arrived
and at the end of this journey a
Monumental problem loomed ahead of him
that's because the geography of the
Italian peninsula made it something of a
natural Fortress
beginning in the Cretaceous Period
around 100 million years ago the steady
northward movement of the African
continental plate crushing beneath the
Eurasian plate in the region of Sicily
had caused the Earth's crust to bend and
pleat driving up a dramatic series of
mountains that form a sheer wall between
the Italian Peninsula and Celtic Western
Europe which the Romans called Gaul
these mountains known as the Alps can
Tower up to five kilometers from sea
level with permanent snow-capped Peaks
choked with icy glaciers and with only a
few narrow Crossing points
the Roman writer amianus marcolinus
describes the appearance of the Alps at
this time
this country of Gaul because of its
lofty chains of mountains always covered
with formidable snows was formerly all
but unknown to the inhabitants of the
rest of the globe except where it
borders on the coast and Mountain ball
walks enclose it on every side
surrounding it naturally as if by the
art of man
the most commonly used roads were the
ones that went around this natural wall
the narrow Corridor that follows the
coastline past what is now the French
Port Town of nice
but as the only way into and out of
Italy these roads were heavily defended
and lined with forts stacked with Roman
legionaries
here the Romans could have staged a
fearsome defense
faced with this problem Hannibal would
need a daring solution
and it's here that those stories may
have come back to him stories he must
have heard as a child of the Great Hero
Hercules leading his herd of cattle
directly over the Alps
the Romans believed that it was
impossible to cross the Alps with an
army weighed down with supplies with
horses oxen and with a herd of 37
elephants
it would be Madness to even attempt it
and for that reason it was the last
thing they would ever have expected
when spring came and the Romans heard of
the carthaginian army beginning its
March they sent ambassadors along the
coastal roads and into what they called
trans-alpine Gaul there were Celtic
tribes of Gauls living on both the
Italian and the northern side of the
Alps and so the Romans used the Latin
word sis meaning on this side and trans
meaning on the other side to
differentiate between them the Roman
ambassadors approached the leaders of
these transalpine Ghouls and informed
them of the carthaginian army then
making its way towards them
they asked these ghouls to Bar the way
to Hannibal and his troops
but they didn't get the reception they'd
hoped for as Livy describes
when the envoys boasting of the Renown
and Valor of the Roman people and the
extent of their Dominion requested the
ghouls to deny the Phoenician A Passage
through their lands and cities if he
should attempt to carry the war into
Italy it is said that they burst out
into such peels of laughter that the
magistrates and Elders could scarce
reduce the younger mental order
so stupid and impudent a thing it seemed
to propose that the ghouls should bring
down the war on their own heads and
offer their own fields to be pillaged in
place of other men's
this was perhaps the first sign that
things weren't going to go as the Romans
might have wished
his marched South Hannibal did encounter
significant resistance from local
peoples who didn't welcome the presence
of his army
and in France it was only through the
excessive distribution of gifts that the
Gauls allowed him and his men to pass
the first true obstacle was the river
Rhone one of France's largest rivers
here Hannibal's Army crossed with
difficulty building rafts to Ferry his
man and Equipment across
but the elephants he opposed A
significant challenge
these animals were terrified of water
and so to get them across the
carthaginians built enormous rafts built
from Whole Tree Trunks and covered them
with Earth and turf so that the
elephants would believe they were still
standing on dry land
in that way they were able to coax two
of the females onto the rafts and across
the river
and from there the rest of the herd were
ferried across
Hannibal Then followed the River Road
North and found a tribe of Gauls who
agreed to help him achieve his
impossible plan
to cross the vast natural barrier of the
Alps
these ghouls gave Hannibal and his men
supplies and warm clothing for the
Mountain Crossing but the task ahead was
still staggering
by this time it was October winter was
closing in and the passes of the Alps
were choked with ice and snow
the later Roman writer amianus
marcolinas writes One account of these
treacherous Alpine passes
in these Alps their Rises are lofty
Ridge which scarcely anyone can cross
without Danger
for as one comes from Gaul it falls off
with sheer incline
terrible to look upon because of
overhanging cliffs on either side
the Nova precipitous Ravines on either
side and chasms rendered treacherous
through the accumulation of Ice Men and
animals descending with hesitating steps
slide forward and wagons as well
in Winter the ground caked with ice and
as if it were polished and therefore
slippery drives men headlong in their
gate and the spreading valleys made
treacherous by Ice sometimes swallow up
The Traveler
the march to the top of the pass took
nine days and we can only imagine the
hardship that these men their horses and
oxen and elephants all endured during
those days
but on the ninth day they reached the
top
and now gazed down through the Alpine
pass into the green lowlands of Italy
stretching out below them
but the descent from the mountains would
prove to be even more treacherous than
the climb
on their way down they found that a
recent Landslide had turned what was
already a difficult Road into an
unpassable precipice
the historian Livi describes the
obstacle that faced them
the result was a horrible struggle the
ice affording no foothold in any case at
least of all on a steep slope
when a man tried by hands or knees to
get on his feet again even those useless
supports slipped from under him and let
him down
there were no stumps or Roots anywhere
to afford a purchase to either hand or
foot
in short there was nothing for it but to
roll and Slither on the smooth ice and
melting snow
the decision was made to cut a stepped
path into this sheer wall and the
episode has become one of the most
famous in the mythical retelling of
these events that would take place over
the next centuries
The Story Goes that Hannibal ordered his
men to gather large amounts of wood and
build a great fire against The Rock of
the precipice
as the fire blazed and the Flames licked
at the icy Stone The Rock heated up then
the soldiers would pour their rations of
sour wine against the heated Rock
causing its temperature to rapidly drop
and The Rock to crack
with iron tools they then worked away at
these fissures until after four days of
Labor steps were cut into the Rock as
Livy recounts
after thus heating the Crag with fire
they opened away in it with iron tools
and relieved the steepness of the slope
with zigzags of an easy gradient
so that not only the baggage animals but
even the elephants could be let down
four days were consumed at the cliff and
the animal was nearly perished of
starvation
for the mountain tops are all
practically bare and such grasses does
grow is buried under snow
whether this episode unfolded quite in
this manner or not from the perspective
of Hannibal's followers the purpose of
telling this story was clear
here was a new Hercules it said a man
who has crossed the Alps with his herd
of elephants a man who achieves great
labors wherever he goes a man For Whom
The Very Rock of the mountain presents
no obstacle
climbing down into the Foothills the men
must have felt the lowland warmth wash
over their skin for the first time with
a sense of enormous relief as Livy
recounts
lower down one comes to valleys and
sunny slopes and rivelets and near them
woods and places that begin to be fitted
for man's habitation there the beasts
were turned out to graze and the man
exhausted with toiling at the road were
allowed to rest
but the audacity of Hannibal's plan had
come at a cost as polybius writes
when Hannibal crossed the Rhone he had
38 000 infantry and more than 8 000
Cavalry he lost nearly half in the past
while the survivors had by these long
continued sufferings become almost
Savage in look and general appearance
nevertheless Hannibal and his men now
stood and looked out over the lands of
Italy below
they had caught the Romans completely by
surprise
[Music]
at the outbreak of war with Carthage
Rome knew that Hannibal's Army was on
the move
they sent out Messengers to find out any
word about the location of his forces
but recently they had been coming back
empty-handed
after crossing the river Rhone the
carthaginian general had disappeared
he wasn't in Gaul he wasn't in Spain for
the Romans the situation must have been
puzzling and a little concerning
when news came to them of what Hannibal
had done the first note of panic began
to set in
polybius recounts the reaction of one
Roman general
Publius had not expected that Hannibal
would even attempt the passage of the
Alps or if he did attempt it that he
could Escape utter destruction
he was immensely astonished at his
courage and adventurous daring when he
heard that he had not only got safe
across but was actually besieging
certain towns in Italy
the Roman government was typically slow
moving and the speed of Hannibal's
attack had stunned them
scarcely had the last rumor about the
taking of saguntum by the carthaginians
ceased to attract attention then news
came that Hannibal had arrived in Italy
with his army
what made matters worse was that
Hannibal was now recruiting allies from
the CIS Alpine Gauls in the foothills of
the Alps Celtic tribes on the Italian
side of the mountains who had fought
with the Romans before
the Roman senate went into a panic they
brought up reinforcements from Sicily
from an army that at that moment had
been preparing to invade Africa
the general sempronius longus LED this
Army of more than forty thousand to
intercept Hannibal's forces in Northern
Italy they met at the Battle of trebia
in December of the Year 218 BC
and here Hannibal's powerful and
determined forces utterly smashed the
Roman army killing at least 20 000
soldiers
when news of this defeat reached Rome
the mood in the Senate must have been
bleak
Hannibal marched South and crossed the
apennine mountains that run down the
center of Italy and crushed another
Roman army on the shore of Lake
trasamine killing another 15 000 Romans
and capturing 10 000 prisoners
from there his March seemed to be
unstoppable
Hannibal would Rampage across Italy for
a total of 15 years
chastened by their defeats the Romans
now avoided any battles with him trying
instead to suffocate his army and cut
off his supplies
they even resorted to a scorched Earth
campaign in which they burned their own
Countryside in a desperate attempt to
starve Hannibal's troops
Hannibal's strategy was to March South
hoping that the conquered Greek cities
of southern Italy would greet him as a
liberator and throw off the rule of
their Roman Masters
but the journey was hard on his way all
but the largest of his elephants would
die as a result of the harsh Italian
winter and while riding through the
marshes of central Italy Hannibal
himself caught an infection that caused
the loss of one of his eyes
when he reached southern Italy he seized
a vast Supply Depot at the Taran of Kane
and the Roman senate realized their
strategy of suffocating him wouldn't
work
they ordered a vast Army to be drawn up
86 000 Soldiers the largest that had
ever been raised in Roman history and
with this Force they sent the best and
brightest of Roman society to March
South to meet Hannibal at Kane
Hannibal now frustrated with these
months without a battle was all too
eager to accept
once again the Roman army was utterly
smashed and the defeat was so total that
even high members of Roman society were
slaughtered on the battlefield
Livi describes the aftermath
it is said that 45
500 foot and 2 700 horse was slain in an
almost equal proportion of citizens and
allies
in the number were the questers of both
consoles and 29 military tribunes some
of Consular rank some of praetorian and
besides these 80 senators or men who had
held officers which would have given
them the right to be elected to the
Senate but had volunteered to serve as
soldiers in the legions the prisoners
taken in this battle are said to have
numbered 3 000 foot soldiers
and 1500 Horsemen
when news of this staggering defeat
reached Rome the city went into a panic
the people of Rome began seeing evil
Omens and portents everywhere one
Senator was dispatched to Greece to
consult the Oracle at Delphi
and as the carthaginians had once done
under Threat by Agatha Cleese the Romans
resorted to rituals of human sacrifice
to appease their angry Gods as Livy
describes
by the direction of the books of Fate
some unusual sacrifices were offered
amongst others a gaulish man and woman
and a Greek man and woman were buried
alive in the cattle market in a place
walled in with stone which even before
this time had been defiled with human
victims
a sacrifice holy alien to the Roman
spirit
to raise a new Army the Romans reduced
the age of boys that were allowed to
serve in the military 217 and began
enlisting criminals those with crushing
debts and even slaves
but their situation looked bleak
after the battle of Kane many of the old
Greek cities of southern Italy began to
join Hannibal and rebel against Rome
Sicily looked like it could break free
too and for the next 11 years war would
rage all over southern Italy
in the year 211 BC Hannibal even marched
against Rome itself causing great panic
in the city
but like the Greek king Paris before him
Hannibal saw no hope of breaching the
city's imposing Serbian walls
the carthaginian Senate made several
attempts to open up a new front in this
war and capitalize on Hannibal's
stunning success they sent armies into
Northern Italy and Sicily hoping to
regain some of their former territories
but none of their other generals had the
same ability
and these attempts all ended in defeat
Rome now realized that trying to stop
Hannibal was useless
and the only way they could turn the
tide of this war was to attack Carthage
in return
they sent one Army into Spain led by a
general named Publius Cornelius Scipio
who had been among the few survivors of
the battle of Kane
and he was remarkably successful
in the year 209 BC in a devastating blow
Scipio managed to capture the Spanish
capital of New Carthage
three years later he defeated the last
remaining carthaginian Army in Spain
essentially seizing the entire Province
and its abundant Silver Mines for Rome
despite everything Hannibal had achieved
the war was starting to turn in Rome's
favor
four years later in 205 BC with Hannibal
still rampaging in Italy the Romans gave
Scipio command of the armies of Sicily
and ordered him to set sail for Africa
to bring this war to the gates of
Carthage itself
after a year of preparation
Scipio set sail in 204 BC
faced with this Invasion that could
behead his entire Society Hannibal was
forced to take his army and leave Italy
to hurry back to Carthage and defend the
city
as the Roman poet silius italicus
renders it
Carthage with all her limbs severed now
dependent on a single man only the name
of Hannibal prevented her great realm
from sliding into utter ruin
envoys promptly set sail crossing the
sea to recall him with a plea from his
country warning that should he choose to
linger the city of Carthage might exist
no more
Hannibal marshaled all the forces of
Carthage and met Publius Scipio in North
Africa in October of the Year 202 BC at
a place called Zama
here on the eve of battle Scipio and
Hannibal finally met for the first time
and Hannibal seems to have presented a
dejected weary face as polybius writes
the next day both commanders Advanced
from their camps attended by a few
Horsemen presently they left these
escorts and met in the intervening Space
by themselves each accompanied by an
interpreter Hannibal was the first to
speak
after the usual salutation he said that
he wished that the Romans had never
coveted any possession outside Italy nor
the carthaginians outside Libya
to this battle Hannibal brought 80
elephants from The Stables of Carthage
but recently one of carthage's most
important allies the kingdom of New
Media to their West had seen the writing
on the wall and had switched sides
declaring for Rome
for centuries numidia had provided
Carthage with its crucial Cavalry and
now Carthage found itself facing these
same numidian horsemen on the
battlefield
on top of this the Romans had developed
new tactics to neutralize carthage's
great strength The Fearsome war
elephants
when the battle began the elephants of
Carthage charged but the Roman lines
opened up to swallow them containing
them with Spears and pelting them with
javelins
these animals panicked and stampeded
back through the carthaginian lines
in the chaos the numidian Cavalry now
fighting with the Romans swung into the
rear of the carthaginian ranks and
Hannibal's Army was driven from the
field he only narrowly escaped with his
life
after 17 long years of war Carthage was
once again decisively defeated
after the years of the destruction that
Hannibal had wrought in Italy Rome was
in no mood to be lenient
they forced Carthage to sign an even
more crushing peace treaty than the
first
all of its overseas territories in Spain
and elsewhere were stripped away from it
and many of its lands in North Africa
were handed over to the numidians
and Carthage was ordered to pay more
than 370 tons of silver nearly five
times the amount they had paid after the
first Punic War
the treaty also aimed to destroy
carthage's ability to wage war in the
future it banned them from keeping any
war elephants all of which were handed
over to the Romans and restricted the
size of their Fleet to only 10 ships
barely enough to even protect them from
Pirates
the rest of the carthaginian Navy was
burned in its port
the Roman poet salius italicus describes
the scene
then Carthage witnessed a dreadful sight
her Fleet being set Ablaze the waves a
glow with the sudden conflagration while
nerius lord of the ocean trembled at the
glare
the carthaginians were restricted from
declaring war anywhere outside of Africa
and only in Africa if they got the
permission of Rome first
the new political situation was clear
Carthage was now entirely subservient to
Rome
Hannibal would live for another 20 years
after the battle of Zama although he
would go into Exile in the East retiring
to Tire the mother city of Carthage and
then to the salukid Empire and Armenia
the writer pozanius claims that he died
when he cut his finger on his drawn
sword and developed septicemia from the
wound
other more dramatic stories describe him
taking poison when he finds his Dwelling
Place surrounded by soldiers loyal to
the Romans come to capture him and take
him back to Rome in Chains
the Second Punic War was over
and once more peace returned to that
part of the Mediterranean that would
last for another 50 years
during this time despite its diminished
situation Carthage continued to flourish
ironically it seemed to do them good to
be freed from the responsibilities of
Defending far-flung colonies and
territories that for centuries had
drained their Treasury
nothing about the war had changed the
city's Central role in the network of
Mediterranean trade
money still flowed into it from all
corners of the sea so much so that the
carthaginians offered to pay off the
entirety of the reparations they owed to
Rome just 10 years after the end of the
war when the treaty had given them 50
years to pay it
some of the largest and grandest
buildings in Carthage were constructed
during these decades after the Second
Punic War
for the people of the city
it must have been a time of renewed hope
as the wounds of the long conflict began
to heal
but their diminished political situation
did have its downsides
banned from declaring war without Roman
permission Carthage repeatedly found
itself defenseless against ambitious
rivals in North Africa
and one of these was the new Roman Ally
and King of New Media named massanissa
massiniso was the king who had betrayed
the carthaginians before the Battle of
Zama sending his powerful numidian
Cavalry to fight for the Romans and
possibly tipping the entire battle in
their favor
as a result he had lived a long and
prosperous life
he was now at the age of 86 and his long
Reign had seen numidia Break Free of
Carthage and become a North African
power in its own right and a loyal Ally
of Rome
but masonissa wasn't content with this
and he always coveted more land for his
growing Kingdom
with the power of Rome now backing him
and carthage's hands tied behind its
back he repeatedly moved to seize
wealthy pieces of land from the weakened
former Empire
the carthaginians Bound by their treaty
had to appeal to the Romans to allow
them to defend themselves
but Rome considered massanissa a crucial
Ally and they always ruled in his favor
Carthage was like a great stricken whale
slowly being eaten alive by sharks
in the year 152 BC half a century after
the end of the Second Punic War the
numidian King massanissa seized a
particularly Rich tract of Farmland that
had belonged to Carthage for centuries
and the carthaginians were
understandably upset as the Roman
historian Appian writes
not long afterward massinisa raised a
dispute about the land known as the big
fields and the country belonging to 50
towns which is called tiska
again the carthaginians had recourse to
the Romans again the latter promised to
send envoys to arbitrate the matter but
they delayed until it seemed probable
that the carthaginian interests would be
utterly ruined
Rome finally agreed to send a delegation
to Carthage to mediate this dispute
one of the men sent as part of this
delegation was an irascible Roman
Senator by the name of Cato the Elder
Cato at this time was 81 years old and
has spent much of his time in the Senate
railing against what he perceived as the
increasingly loose morals of Roman
society
as a young man he had fought against the
armies of Hannibal in Italy and as a
result he had grown to utterly to test
the carthaginians and everything they
stood for
when he arrived in Carthage Cato
expected to find the city a barbarian
Backwater impoverished by its two
subsequent defeats at the hands of Rome
but what he found horrified him
Carthage was a booming City that seemed
to be doing better than ever
and to his shock the visible wealth of
the city seemed to outdo that of Rome
itself
in plutarch's biography of Cato he
describes the old senator's reaction
the city was by no means in a poor and
lowly State as the Romans supposed but
rather teeming with vigorous fighting
men overflowing with enormous wealth
filled with arms of every sort and with
military suppliers and more than a
little emboldened by all this
the writer Appian records another
version of this moment as the Senators
rode through the wealthy landscape
outside the city
they carefully observed the country they
saw how diligently it was cultivated and
what greatest States it possessed they
entered the city and saw how greatly it
had increased in wealth and population
since it's overthrow by Scipio not long
before
when they returned to Rome they declared
that Carthage was to them an object of
apprehension rather than of jealousy the
city being so ill-affected so near to
them and growing so rapidly
the old Senator Cato was shaken by his
experience
from then he would dedicate the final
years of his life to a single cause
now at every debate in the Senate Cato
would end every one of his statements
whether on the price of grain or the
wars in Gaul whether on the appointment
of new consoles or the response to a
flood in the South with a single phrase
furthermore I believe Carthage must be
destroyed
many in the Roman senate were starting
to agree with him
[Music]
finally a year after Cato's visit to
Carthage the carthaginians had had
enough of the numidian king massanissa
taking advantage of their situation
they sent an army of 50 000 men to seize
back some of the Farmland that he had
taken but their army was decisively
defeated by the numidians
carthage's last attempt to defend itself
had been a failure but to the Romans it
was also a breach of their treaty and it
was enough of a pretext to go to war one
final time to destroy their old rival
for good
[Music]
in the year 149 BC the old Phoenician
city of Utica seems to have felt the
change in the winds they also changed
allegiances declaring their loyalty to
Rome and in the same year a large Roman
army used the port of Utica to land in
North Africa and prepared to march on
the city of Carthage
at news of this Army Landing the
carthaginians were distraught
they sent envoys to meet the Romans and
when they arrived the Romans demanded
that the city be completely
demilitarized and hand over all of their
military equipment
the carthaginians complied
they came back with every piece of armor
and weaponry they could find offering
their total surrender and with the Roman
generals sitting over them on his high
seat they pleaded with the Romans not to
go to war
Carthage was now completely disarmed and
in response the Romans offered them
peace on one condition
but it was a condition so absurd that
even they must have known it would be
rejected
they demanded that the carthaginians
abandoned their city so that it could be
demolished in its entirety and moved 16
kilometers or so in land and away from
the sea
Appian recounts these Roman demands
sensorinus Rose and with a Stern
countenance spoke yield Carthage to us
and betake yourselves where you like
within your own territory at a distance
of at least 10 miles from the sea for we
are resolved to raise your City to the
ground
such a task would be virtually
impossible and of course for the
sea-going Phoenicians of Carthage would
have essentially ended their livelihoods
for good
moving the city would have meant
abandoning their temples the cemeteries
where their ancestors were buried every
street and Corner that they knew
Appian records the outpouring of grief
as the carthaginians were informed of
the Roman plans
while he was yet speaking the Carthage
unions lifted their hands toward heaven
with loud cries and called on the Gods
they flung themselves on the ground and
beat it with their hands and heads some
of them even tore their clothes and
lacerated their flesh as though they
were absolutely bereft of their senses
after the first frenzy was passed there
was great silence and prostration as of
men lying dead
so pitiable was this mingling together
of public and private grief that had
Drew tears from the Romans themselves
the carthaginians withdrew to their city
and the entire civilian population
prepared to withstand their attackers
the historian Appian summarizes the dire
situation that the citizens of Carthage
faced
they reflected that their city was
without arms but it was empty of
Defenders that it had not a ship not a
catapult not a javelin not a sword nor a
sufficient number of fighting men
they had neither mercenaries nor friends
nor allies nor time to procure any their
enemies were in possession of their
children their arms and their territory
their city was besieged by foes provided
with ships infantry Cavalry and engines
while massanissa their other enemy was
on their flank
but the city was still a formidable
Fortress its triple line of defensive
walls could withstand any assault
and it had complex systems for Gathering
rainwater and storing it in vast
cisterns allowing it to maintain a
continuous supply of fresh drinking
water
the Romans settled in for a Siege but
soon found it to be much more difficult
than they had expected
they controlled the Seas but Swift
carthaginian Sailors were still able to
smuggle food into the city's Harbor at
night
foreign
the Romans tried again and again to
storm the city walls but each time they
were fought back by the citizens now
fighting tooth and nail for their
survival with every tool and improvised
weapon they could find as Appian
recounts
all the sacred places the temples and
every other unoccupied space were turned
into workshops where men and women
worked together day and night without
pause taking their food by turns on a
fixed schedule each day they made a
hundred Shields 300 swords a thousand
missiles for catapults 500 darts and
javelins and as many catapults as they
could for strings to bend them the women
cut off their hair for want of other
fibers
the siege of Carthage went on for three
years
in the year 147 command of the besieging
army was given to a new Consul in fact
the 36 year old adopted grandson of the
great Publius Scipio who had beat
Hannibal at the Battle of Zama some 50
years earlier a man named Scipio
emilianus
with him came his personal friend and
official documenter of the Expedition
the Greek historian polybius who writes
this part of his history as an
eyewitness
infuriated at the Smugglers still
supplying the besieged city the Roman
general Scipio ordered a vast Stone
barrier to be built in the mouth of
carthage's Harbor blocking any further
attempts to resupply it
food became scarce in the city
but still The Defenders struggled on
but in the spring of the Year 146 BC the
spirit of the carthaginians was
exhausted
Scipio launched a full-scale assault of
the city from the area of the harbor and
the great Wars of Carthage were finally
breached
the Roman Legions poured into the City
and began to Massacre every person they
could find
Appian describes the scenes that
followed
[Music]
then came new scenes of Horror as the
fire spread and carried everything down
the soldiers did not wait to destroy the
buildings little by little but all in a
heap so the crashing grew louder and
many corpses fell with the stones into
the midst others were seen still living
especially old men women and young
children who had hidden in the inmost
nooks of the houses some of them wounded
some more or less burned an uttering
piteous cries
still others Thrust out and falling from
such a height with the Stone's Timbers
and fire were torn asunder in all shapes
of horror crushed and mangled trenches
were filled with men the tug of war the
glory of approaching Victory the rush of
the soldiery the orders of the officers
the blast of the trumpets tribunes and
centurions marching their cohorts hither
and thither
all together made everybody frantic and
heedless of the spectacles under their
eyes
the slaughter of carthage's citizens
went on for six days during which it's
thought that an estimated 60 000 people
were put to the sword
the Roman general Scipio set his
soldiers to work in shifts so that they
would not become tired of The Killing
and on the seventh day Scipio ordered
his soldiers to begin taking prisoners
from this point a further 50 000
carthaginians were rounded up and sold
into slavery
from there they will be sold and
dispersed to all corners of the Roman
Republic
Carthage was burned to the ground and
demolished Brick by Brick
some carthaginians held out for some
time in the Citadel of birsa the
Fortified hill on which Legend has it
that elishaya once cut Apart Her oxide
at the city's founding
according to Appian when the
carthaginian general has Drupal finally
surrendered his wife Set Fire to the
main Temple and climbed upon its roof
just like the mythical figure of
elishaya she then cast herself and her
children into the flames
it is said that as the fire was lighted
the wife of Hazard in full view of
Scipio a raid in the best attire
possible under such circumstances
and with her children by her side
said in scipio's hearing
for you Roman the gods have no cause of
indignation
since you exercise the right of War
upon this Hazard about betrayer of his
country and her temples of me and his
children may the gods of Carthage take
vengeance
and you be their instrument
having reproached him thus she slew her
children flung them into the fire and
plunged in after them
such they say was the death
of the wife of astronaut
the historian polybius who accompanied
Scipio throughout the entire Siege
writes with little detail about what
unfolded but he does note that in the
moment of his victory the Roman general
turned to him and said something strange
in the burning ruins of Carthage Scipio
emilianus seems to have felt a spark of
apprehension a sudden fear or
realization that one day the same fate
might befall his own great city of Rome
turning around to me at once and
grasping my hand skipio said
a glorious moment polybius
but I have a dreadful boating that
someday the same Doom will be pronounced
on my own country
it would be difficult to mention an
assurance more statement-like and more
profound
at the moment of our greatest Triumph
and of disaster to our enemies to bear
in mind that the season of success the
mutability of Fortune
Appian records that Scipio is said to
have wept at the site of Carthage
burning and that he recited a lion from
Homer's great epic The Iliad in which
Andro Maki the wife of Hector laments
the coming destruction of Troy
Scipio beholding this city which had
flourished 700 years from its foundation
and had ruled over so many lands islands
and seas rich with arms and fleets
elephants and money equal to the
mightiest monarchies but far surpassing
them in bravery and High Spirit now come
to its end in total Destruction
Scipio be holding this spectacle is said
to have shed tears and publicly lamented
the fortune of the enemy after
meditating by himself a long time and
reflecting on the rise and fall of
cities Nations and Empires as well as of
individuals upon the fate of Troy that
once proud City upon that of the
Assyrians the medes and the Persians
greatest of all and later The Splendid
Macedonian Empire either voluntarily or
otherwise the words of the poet escaped
his lips
the day shall come in which our sacred
Troy and pream and the people over whom
spear bearing pream rules Shall Perish
all
but back in Rome there was no such sense
of foreboding the city exploded in
celebration at the news
when the people of Rome heard of the
victory early in the evening they poured
into the streets and spent the whole
night congratulating and embracing each
other like people just now delivered
from some great fear just now confirmed
in their worldwide Supremacy just now
assured of the permanence of their own
City and winners of such a victory as
never before
they talked about the height of the
walls and the size of the stones
they pictured to each other the whole
War as though it were just taking place
under their own eyes
in the days that followed Ash would have
settled over the charred ruins of
Carthage
from its final victory in the Punic Wars
Rome would emerge as the only superpower
left in the Mediterranean
the scattered Greek kingdoms that
remained were one by one absorbed by it
and in the coming centuries it would
grow to Encompass the entire shore of
that sea cover all but the farther
stretches of Western Europe and shape
the entire course of European history
but Carthage would become just a name a
coin that had lost its value an emblem
of an age that had passed into nothing
after the Carnage of The Siege the
blackened ruins of the city were emptied
of all life
but for the Romans this still wasn't
enough
in the years that followed they sent
further delegations to the city to
systematically take it apart piece by
piece to ensure that no population crept
back to repopulate its ruins that never
again would their great rival resurface
in North Africa
some of the libraries and Archives of
Carthage survived the burning of the
city
and these were kept the books of
carthaginian History perhaps poetry and
mythology science and medicine documents
of The Phoenician Voyages of Discovery
to the edges of the world
but all of these were taken by the
Romans
some were simply burned while others
were distributed among the Romans
African allies
as a result not a single one of these
Works has survived
today scarcely a few documents written
by a carthaginian can be read and no
works of literature or history have come
down to us
and so for the next 2 000 years their
story would be told by others
their voices and their memory just like
their city were completely erased
the territory of Carthage was absorbed
into the new Roman province of Africa
and for the next hundred years what
remained of the ruins of Carthage were
left to crumble into the Sands home to
wild dogs overgrown with scrub and weeds
and maram grass washed with salt from
the Sea Air
the roost of gulls and crows
more than a century later Rome would
send a party of three thousand colonists
to the ruins of the shattered City and
they founded a Roman Colony on the
rubble
as they settled the area the ruins of
Carthage were themselves buried beneath
a new Roman town that shared almost
nothing of the city that had once stood
there except its name
and even the ruins of the city as it had
once been would soon be forgotten
around the year 1835 the British
Statesman sir Granville Temple visited
the ruins of Carthage and wrote The
Following description of his
disappointment upon finding how little
remained of that once great City
early on the morning following I walked
to the site of the great Carthage of
that town at the sound of whose name
Mighty Rome herself had so often
trembled
I was prepared to see but few vestiges
of its former grandeur
but my heart sunk within me when
ascending one of its Hills for I beheld
nothing more than a few scattered and
shapeless masses of masonry its very
name is now unknown to the present
inhabitants
buried in the Silence of the grave no
living Soul appearing except
occasionally a soldier going or
returning from the fort or the solitary
and motionless figure of an Arab
watching his flocks from the summit of
the fragment of some former Palace or
Temple
Solitude and silence hold sway over the
whole scene a scene which impresses on
the mind a feeling of melancholy which I
found difficult to shake off
another person who visited these ruins
was the English poet Leticia Elizabeth
Landon and I'd like to end the episode
with her poem entitled Carthage
as you listen imagine what it would feel
like to watch the streets and temples of
that City crumble and burn as 800 years
of history is buried beneath ash and
soot
imagine every book that has ever been
written in your native language
destroyed and your people enslaved and
Scattered about the face of the Earth
imagine what it would feel like to see
your own Hometown disappear emptied of
all life and demolished Brick by Brick
then left empty until only a scattering
of ruins remains
blow it lieth Earth to Earth
all to which that Earth gave birth
Palace Market Street and feign
dust that never asks in vain
hath reclaimed its own again
dust
the wide world's King
where are now the Glorious hours of a
Nations gathered powers
like the setting of a star in the
fathomless afar
times
Eternal wing
half around those ruins cast the dark
presence of the past
thou Dost build thy home on sand
and the palace girdled strand
fadeth like a dream
thy great victories only show
all is nothingness below
thank you once again for listening to
the fall of civilizations podcast
I'd like to thank my voice actors for
this episode Michael hagiantones Lachlan
Lucas Alexandra Bolton Simon Jackson Tom
Marshall Lee Chris Harvey Nick Denton
and Paul Cassell
Sound Engineering was by Alexei sibikin
I'd like to thank my historical advisor
for this episode Dr Michael J Taylor
from the University of Albany
original music was composed and produced
by pavlos capralos featuring sasuri on
percussion Anastasia papadopullo on
vocals June faletti on oboe and on the
Ood and flute pavlos capralos
all original tracks composed for this
episode will be available to download
for all patreon subscribers
a public list of all sources and
recommended reading for this episode
will also be available on patreon
I'd love to hear your thoughts and
responses on Twitter so please come and
tell me what you thought you can follow
me at Paul M Cooper if you'd like
updates about the podcast announcements
about new episodes as well as images
maps and reading suggestions you can
follow the podcast at fall of Civ pod
with underscores separating the words
this podcast can only keep going with
the support of our generous subscribers
on patreon you helped me cover my costs
and help me keep the podcast ad free
you also let me dedicate more time to
researching writing recording and
editing to get the episodes out to you
faster and bring as much life and detail
to them as possible
I want to thank all my subscribers for
making this happen
if you enjoyed this episode please
consider heading onto patreon.com
forward slash full of civilizations
underscore podcast or just Google full
of civilizations patreon that's
p-a-t-r-e-o-n
for now all the best and thanks for
listening
[Music]